§1006.1 Authority, purpose, and coverage.
(a) Authority. This part, known as Regulation F, is issued by the Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection pursuant to sections 814(d) and 817 of the Fair Debt Collection Practices Act (FDCPA or Act), 15 U.S.C. 1692l(d), 1692o; title X of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act), 12 U.S.C. 5481 et seq.; and paragraph (b)(1) of section 104 of the Electronic Signatures in Global and National Commerce Act (E-SIGN Act), 15 U.S.C. 7004.
(b) Purpose. This part carries out the purposes of the FDCPA, which include eliminating abusive debt collection practices by debt collectors, ensuring that debt collectors who refrain from using abusive debt collection practices are not competitively disadvantaged, and promoting consistent State action to protect consumers against debt collection abuses. This part also prescribes requirements to ensure that certain features of debt collection are disclosed fully, accurately, and effectively to consumers in a manner that permits consumers to understand the costs, benefits, and risks associated with debt collection, in light of the facts and circumstances. Finally, this part imposes record retention requirements to enable the Bureau to administer and carry out the purposes of the FDCPA, the Dodd-Frank Act, and this part, as well as to prevent evasions thereof. The record retention requirements also will facilitate supervision of debt collectors and the assessment and detection of risks to consumers.
(c) Coverage.
(1) Except as provided in §1006.108 and appendix A of this part regarding applications for State exemptions from the FDCPA, this part applies to debt collectors, as defined in §1006.2(i), other than a person excluded from coverage by section 1029(a) of the Consumer Financial Protection Act of 2010, title X of the Dodd-Frank Act (12 U.S.C. 5519(a)).
(2) Section 1006.34(c)(2)(iii) and (3)(iv) applies to debt collectors only when they are collecting debt related to a consumer financial product or service as defined in §1006.2(f).
§1006.2 Definitions.
For purposes of this part, the following definitions apply:
(a) Act or FDCPA means the Fair Debt Collection Practices Act (15 U.S.C. 1692 et seq.).
(b) Attempt to communicate means any act to initiate a communication or other contact about a debt with any person through any medium, including by soliciting a response from such person. An attempt to communicate includes leaving a limited-content message, as defined in paragraph (j) of this section.
(c) Bureau means the Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection.
(d) Communicate or communication means the conveying of information regarding a debt directly or indirectly to any person through any medium.
(e) Consumer means any natural person, whether living or deceased, obligated or allegedly obligated to pay any debt. For purposes of §1006.6, the term consumer includes the persons described in §1006.6(a).
(f) Consumer financial product or service has the same meaning given to it in section 1002(5) of the Dodd-Frank Act (12 U.S.C. 5481(5)).
(g) Creditor means any person who offers or extends credit creating a debt or to whom a debt is owed. The term creditor does not, however, include any person to the extent that such person receives an assignment or transfer of a debt in default solely to facilitate collection of the debt for another.
(h) Debt means any obligation or alleged obligation of a consumer to pay money arising out of a transaction in which the money, property, insurance, or services that are the subject of the transaction are primarily for personal, family, or household purposes, whether or not the obligation has been reduced to judgment.
(i)
(1) Debt collector means any person who uses any instrumentality of interstate commerce or mail in any business the principal purpose of which is the collection of debts, or who regularly collects or attempts to collect, directly or indirectly, debts owed or due, or asserted to be owed or due, to another. Notwithstanding paragraph (i)(2)(vi) of this section, the term debt collector includes any creditor that, in the process of collecting its own debts, uses any name other than its own that would indicate that a third person is collecting or attempting to collect such debts. For purposes of §1006.22(e), the term also includes any person who uses any instrumentality of interstate commerce or mail in any business the principal purpose of which is the enforcement of security interests.
(2) The term debt collector excludes:
(i) Any officer or employee of a creditor while the officer or employee is collecting debts for the creditor in the creditor's name;
(ii) Any person while acting as a debt collector for another person if:
(A) The person acting as a debt collector does so only for persons with whom the person acting as a debt collector is related by common ownership or affiliated by corporate control; and
(B) The principal business of the person acting as a debt collector is not the collection of debts;
(iii) Any officer or employee of the United States or any State to the extent that collecting or attempting to collect any debt is in the performance of the officer's or employee's official duties;
(iv) Any person while serving or attempting to serve legal process on any other person in connection with the judicial enforcement of any debt;
(v) Any nonprofit organization that, at the request of consumers, performs bona fide consumer credit counseling and assists consumers in liquidating their debts by receiving payment from such consumers and distributing such amounts to creditors;
(vi) Any person collecting or attempting to collect any debt owed or due, or asserted to be owed or due to another, to the extent such debt collection activity:
(A) Is incidental to a bona fide fiduciary obligation or a bona fide escrow arrangement;
(B) Concerns a debt that such person originated;
(C) Concerns a debt that was not in default at the time such person obtained it; or
(D) Concerns a debt that such person obtained as a secured party in a commercial credit transaction involving the creditor; and
(vii) A private entity, to the extent such private entity is operating a bad check enforcement program that complies with section 818 of the Act.
(j) Limited-content message means a voicemail message for a consumer that includes all of the content described in paragraph (j)(1) of this section, that may include any of the content described in paragraph (j)(2) of this section, and that includes no other content.
(1) Required content. A limited-content message is a voicemail message for a consumer that includes:
(i) A business name for the debt collector that does not indicate that the debt collector is in the debt collection business;
(ii) A request that the consumer reply to the message;
(iii) The name or names of one or more natural persons whom the consumer can contact to reply to the debt collector; and
(iv) A telephone number or numbers that the consumer can use to reply to the debt collector.
(2) Optional content. In addition to the content described in paragraph (j)(1) of this section, a limited-content message may include one or more of the following:
(i) A salutation;
(ii) The date and time of the message;
(iii) Suggested dates and times for the consumer to reply to the message; and
(iv) A statement that if the consumer replies, the consumer may speak to any of the company's representatives or associates.
(k) Person includes natural persons, corporations, companies, associations, firms, partnerships, societies, and joint stock companies.
(l) State means any State, territory, or possession of the United States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, or any political subdivision of any of the foregoing.
§1006.6 Communications in connection with debt collection.
(a) Definition. For purposes of this section, the term consumer includes:
(1) The consumer's spouse;
(2) The consumer's parent, if the consumer is a minor;
(3) The consumer's legal guardian;
(4) The executor or administrator of the consumer's estate, if the consumer is deceased; and
(5) A confirmed successor in interest, as defined in Regulation X, 12 CFR 1024.31, or Regulation Z, 12 CFR 1026.2(a)(27)(ii).
(b) Communications with a consumer-
(1) Prohibitions regarding unusual or inconvenient times or places. Except as provided in paragraph (b)(4) of this section, a debt collector must not communicate or attempt to communicate with a consumer in connection with the collection of any debt:
(i) At any unusual time, or at a time that the debt collector knows or should know is inconvenient to the consumer. In the absence of the debt collector's knowledge of circumstances to the contrary, a time before 8:00 a.m. and after 9:00 p.m. local time at the consumer's location is inconvenient; or
(ii) At any unusual place, or at a place that the debt collector knows or should know is inconvenient to the consumer.
(2) Prohibitions regarding consumer represented by an attorney. Except as provided in paragraph (b)(4) of this section, a debt collector must not communicate or attempt to communicate with a consumer in connection with the collection of any debt if the debt collector knows the consumer is represented by an attorney with respect to such debt and knows, or can readily ascertain, the attorney's name and address, unless the attorney:
(i) Fails to respond within a reasonable period of time to a communication from the debt collector; or
(ii) Consents to the debt collector's direct communication with the consumer.
(3) Prohibitions regarding consumer's place of employment. Except as provided in paragraph (b)(4) of this section, a debt collector must not communicate or attempt to communicate with a consumer in connection with the collection of any debt at the consumer's place of employment, if the debt collector knows or has reason to know that the consumer's employer prohibits the consumer from receiving such communication.
(4) Exceptions. The prohibitions in paragraphs (b)(1) through (3) of this section do not apply when a debt collector communicates or attempts to communicate with a consumer in connection with the collection of any debt with:
(i) The prior consent of the consumer, given directly to the debt collector during a communication that does not violate paragraphs (b)(1) through (3) of this section; or
(ii) The express permission of a court of competent jurisdiction.
(c) Communications with a consumer-after refusal to pay or cease communication notice-
(1) Prohibition. Except as provided in paragraph (c)(2) of this section, if a consumer notifies a debt collector in writing that the consumer refuses to pay a debt or that the consumer wants the debt collector to cease further communication with the consumer, the debt collector must not communicate or attempt to communicate further with the consumer with respect to such debt.
(2) Exceptions. The prohibition in paragraph (c)(1) of this section does not apply when a debt collector communicates or attempts to communicate further with a consumer with respect to such debt:
(i) To advise the consumer that the debt collector's further efforts are being terminated;
(ii) To notify the consumer that the debt collector or creditor may invoke specified remedies that the debt collector or creditor ordinarily invokes; or
(iii) Where applicable, to notify the consumer that the debt collector or creditor intends to invoke a specified remedy.
(d) Communications with third parties-
(1) Prohibitions. Except as provided in paragraph (d)(2) of this section, a debt collector must not communicate, in connection with the collection of any debt, with any person other than:
(i) The consumer;
(ii) The consumer's attorney;
(iii) A consumer reporting agency, if otherwise permitted by law;
(iv) The creditor;
(v) The creditor's attorney; or
(vi) The debt collector's attorney.
(2) Exceptions. The prohibition in paragraph (d)(1) of this section does not apply when a debt collector communicates, in connection with the collection of any debt, with a person:
(i) For the purpose of acquiring location information, as provided in §1006.10;
(ii) With the prior consent of the consumer given directly to the debt collector;
(iii) With the express permission of a court of competent jurisdiction; or
(iv) As reasonably necessary to effectuate a postjudgment judicial remedy.
(3) Reasonable procedures for email and text message communications. A debt collector maintains procedures that are reasonably adapted, for purposes of FDCPA section 813(c), to avoid a bona fide error in sending an email or text message communication that would result in a violation of paragraph (d)(1) of this section if those procedures include steps to reasonably confirm and document that:
(i) The debt collector communicated with the consumer by sending an email to an email address described in paragraph (d)(4) of this section or a text message to a telephone number described in paragraph (d)(5) of this section; and
(ii) The debt collector did not communicate with the consumer by sending an email to an email address or a text message to a telephone number that the debt collector knows has led to a disclosure prohibited by paragraph (d)(1) of this section.
(4) Procedures for email addresses. For purposes of paragraph (d)(3)(i) of this section, a debt collector may send an email to an email address if:
(i) Procedures based on communication between the consumer and the debt collector.
(A) The consumer used the email address to communicate with the debt collector about the debt and the consumer has not since opted out of communications to that email address; or
(B) The debt collector has received directly from the consumer prior consent to use the email address to communicate with the consumer about the debt and the consumer has not withdrawn that consent; or
(ii) Procedures based on communication by the creditor.
(A) A creditor obtained the email address from the consumer;
(B) The creditor used the email address to communicate with the consumer about the account and the consumer did not ask the creditor to stop using it;
(C) Before the debt collector used the email address to communicate with the consumer about the debt, the creditor sent the consumer a written or electronic notice, to an address the creditor obtained from the consumer and used to communicate with the consumer about the account, that clearly and conspicuously disclosed:
(1) That the debt has been or will be transferred to the debt collector;
(2) The email address and the fact that the debt collector might use the email address to communicate with the consumer about the debt;
(3) That, if others have access to the email address, then it is possible they may see the emails;
(4) Instructions for a reasonable and simple method by which the consumer could opt out of such communications; and
(5) The date by which the debt collector or the creditor must receive the consumer's request to opt out, which must be at least 35 days after the date the notice is sent;
(D) The opt-out period provided under paragraph (d)(4)(ii)(C)(5) of this section has expired and the consumer has not opted out; and
(E) The email address has a domain name that is available for use by the general public, unless the debt collector knows the address is provided by the consumer's employer.
(iii) Procedures based on communication by the prior debt collector.
(A) Any prior debt collector obtained the email address in accordance with paragraph (d)(4)(i) or (ii) of this section;
(B) The immediately prior debt collector used the email address to communicate with the consumer about the debt; and
(C) The consumer did not opt out of such communications.
(5) Procedures for telephone numbers for text messages. For purposes of paragraph (d)(3)(i) of this section, a debt collector may send a text message to a telephone number if:
(i) The consumer used the telephone number to communicate with the debt collector about the debt by text message, the consumer has not since opted out of text message communications to that telephone number, and within the past 60 days either:
(A) The consumer sent the text message described in paragraph (d)(5)(i) of this section or a new text message to the debt collector from that telephone number; or
(B) The debt collector confirmed, using a complete and accurate database, that the telephone number has not been reassigned from the consumer to another user since the date of the consumer's most recent text message to the debt collector from that telephone number; or
(ii) The debt collector received directly from the consumer prior consent to use the telephone number to communicate with the consumer about the debt by text message, the consumer has not since withdrawn that consent, and within the past 60 days the debt collector either:
(A) Obtained the prior consent described in paragraph (d)(5)(ii) of this section or renewed consent from the consumer; or
(B) Confirmed, using a complete and accurate database, that the telephone number has not been reassigned from the consumer to another user since the date of the consumer's most recent consent to use that telephone number to communicate about the debt by text message.
(e) Opt-out notice for electronic communications or attempts to communicate. A debt collector who communicates or attempts to communicate with a consumer electronically in connection with the collection of a debt using a specific email address, telephone number for text messages, or other electronic-medium address must include in such communication or attempt to communicate a clear and conspicuous statement describing a reasonable and simple method by which the consumer can opt out of further electronic communications or attempts to communicate by the debt collector to that address or telephone number. The debt collector may not require, directly or indirectly, that the consumer, in order to opt out, pay any fee to the debt collector or provide any information other than the consumer's opt-out preferences and the email address, telephone number for text messages, or other electronic-medium address subject to the opt-out request.
§1006.10 Acquisition of location information.
(a) Definition. The term location information means a consumer's:
(1) Place of abode and telephone number at such place; or
(2) Place of employment.
(b) Form and content of location communications. A debt collector communicating with a person other than the consumer for the purpose of acquiring location information must:
(1) Identify himself or herself individually by name, state that he or she is confirming or correcting the consumer's location information, and, only if expressly requested, identify his or her employer;
(2) Not state that the consumer owes any debt;
(3) Not communicate by postcard;
(4) Not use any language or symbol on any envelope or in the contents of any communication by mail indicating that the debt collector is in the debt collection business or that the communication relates to the collection of a debt; and
(5) After the debt collector knows the consumer is represented by an attorney with regard to the subject debt and has knowledge of, or can readily ascertain, such attorney's name and address, not communicate with any person other than that attorney, unless the attorney fails to respond to the debt collector's communication within a reasonable period of time.
(c) Frequency of location communications. In addition to complying with §1006.14(b)(1), a debt collector communicating with any person other than the consumer for the purpose of acquiring location information about the consumer must not communicate more than once with such person unless requested to do so by such person, or unless the debt collector reasonably believes that the earlier response of such person is erroneous or incomplete and that such person now has correct or complete location information.
§1006.14 Harassing, oppressive, or abusive conduct.
(a) In general. A debt collector must not engage in any conduct the natural consequence of which is to harass, oppress, or abuse any person in connection with the collection of a debt, including, but not limited to, the conduct described in paragraphs (b) through (h) of this section.
(b) Repeated or continuous telephone calls or telephone conversations-
(1) In general. In connection with the collection of a debt, a debt collector must not place telephone calls or engage any person in telephone conversation repeatedly or continuously with intent to annoy, abuse, or harass any person at the called number.
(2) Telephone call frequencies; presumptions of compliance and violation.
(i) Subject to the exclusions in paragraph (b)(3) of this section, a debt collector is presumed to comply with paragraph (b)(1) of this section and FDCPA section 806(5) (15 U.S.C. 1692d(5)) if the debt collector places a telephone call to a particular person in connection with the collection of a particular debt neither:
(A) More than seven times within seven consecutive days; nor
(B) Within a period of seven consecutive days after having had a telephone conversation with the person in connection with the collection of such debt. The date of the telephone conversation is the first day of the seven-consecutive-day period.
(ii) Subject to the exclusions in paragraph (b)(3) of this section, a debt collector is presumed to violate paragraph (b)(1) of this section and FDCPA section 806(5) if the debt collector places a telephone call to a particular person in connection with the collection of a particular debt in excess of either of the telephone call frequencies described in paragraph (b)(2)(i) of this section.
(3) Certain telephone calls excluded from the telephone call frequencies. Telephone calls placed to a person do not count toward the telephone call frequencies described in paragraph (b)(2)(i) of this section if they are:
(i) Placed with such person's prior consent given directly to the debt collector and within a period no longer than seven consecutive days after receiving the prior consent, with the date the debt collector receives prior consent counting as the first day of the seven-consecutive-day period;
(ii) Not connected to the dialed number; or
(iii) Placed to the persons described in §1006.6(d)(1)(ii) through (vi).
(4) Definition. For purposes of this paragraph (b), particular debt means each of a consumer's debts in collection. However, in the case of student loan debts, the term particular debt means all student loan debts that a consumer owes or allegedly owes that were serviced under a single account number at the time the debts were obtained by a debt collector.
(c) Violence or other criminal means. In connection with the collection of a debt, a debt collector must not use or threaten to use violence or other criminal means to harm the physical person, reputation, or property of any person.
(d) Obscene or profane language. In connection with the collection of a debt, a debt collector must not use obscene or profane language, or language the natural consequence of which is to abuse the hearer or reader.
(e) Debtor's list. In connection with the collection of a debt, a debt collector must not publish a list of consumers who allegedly refuse to pay debts, except to a consumer reporting agency or to persons meeting the requirements of sections 603(f) or 604(a)(3) of the Fair Credit Reporting Act (15 U.S.C. 1681a(f) or 1681b(a)(3)).
(f) Coercive advertisements. In connection with the collection of a debt, a debt collector must not advertise for sale any debt to coerce payment of the debt.
(g) Meaningful disclosure of identity. In connection with the collection of a debt, a debt collector must not place telephone calls without meaningfully disclosing the caller's identity, except as provided in §1006.10.
(h) Prohibited communication media-
(1) In general. In connection with the collection of any debt, a debt collector must not communicate or attempt to communicate with a person through a medium of communication if the person has requested that the debt collector not use that medium to communicate with the person.
(2) Exceptions. Notwithstanding the prohibition in paragraph (h)(1) of this section:
(i) If a person opts out of receiving electronic communications from a debt collector, a debt collector may send an electronic confirmation of the person's request to opt out, provided that the electronic confirmation contains no information other than a statement confirming the person's request and that the debt collector will honor it;
(ii) If a person initiates contact with a debt collector using a medium of communication that the person previously requested the debt collector not use, the debt collector may respond once through the same medium of communication used by the person; or
(iii) If otherwise required by applicable law, a debt collector may communicate or attempt to communicate with a person in connection with the collection of any debt through a medium of communication that the person has requested the debt collector not use to communicate with the person.
§1006.18 False, deceptive, or misleading representations or means.
(a) In general. A debt collector must not use any false, deceptive, or misleading representation or means in connection with the collection of any debt, including, but not limited to, the conduct described in paragraphs (b) through (d) of this section.
(b) False, deceptive, or misleading representations.
(1) A debt collector must not falsely represent or imply that:
(i) The debt collector is vouched for, bonded by, or affiliated with the United States or any State, including through the use of any badge, uniform, or facsimile thereof.
(ii) The debt collector operates or is employed by a consumer reporting agency, as defined by section 603(f) of the Fair Credit Reporting Act (15 U.S.C. 1681a(f)).
(iii) Any individual is an attorney or that any communication is from an attorney.
(iv) The consumer committed any crime or other conduct in order to disgrace the consumer.
(v) A sale, referral, or other transfer of any interest in a debt causes or will cause the consumer to:
(A) Lose any claim or defense to payment of the debt; or
(B) Become subject to any practice prohibited by this part.
(vi) Accounts have been turned over to innocent purchasers for value.
(vii) Documents are legal process.
(viii) Documents are not legal process forms or do not require action by the consumer.
(2) A debt collector must not falsely represent:
(i) The character, amount, or legal status of any debt.
(ii) Any services rendered, or compensation that may be lawfully received, by any debt collector for the collection of a debt.
(3) A debt collector must not represent or imply that nonpayment of any debt will result in the arrest or imprisonment of any person or the seizure, garnishment, attachment, or sale of any property or wages of any person unless such action is lawful and the debt collector or creditor intends to take such action.
(c) False, deceptive, or misleading collection means. A debt collector must not:
(1) Threaten to take any action that cannot legally be taken or that is not intended to be taken.
(2) Communicate or threaten to communicate to any person credit information that the debt collector knows or should know is false, including the failure to communicate that a disputed debt is disputed.
(3) Use or distribute any written communication that simulates or that the debt collector falsely represents to be a document authorized, issued, or approved by any court, official, or agency of the United States or any State, or that creates a false impression about its source, authorization, or approval.
(4) Use any business, company, or organization name other than the true name of the debt collector's business, company, or organization.
(d) False representations or deceptive means. A debt collector must not use any false representation or deceptive means to collect or attempt to collect any debt or to obtain information concerning a consumer.
(e) Disclosures required-
(1) Initial communications. A debt collector must disclose in its initial communication with a consumer that the debt collector is attempting to collect a debt and that any information obtained will be used for that purpose. If the debt collector's initial communication with the consumer is oral, the debt collector must make the disclosure required by this paragraph again in its initial written communication with the consumer.
(2) Subsequent communications. In each communication with the consumer subsequent to the communications described in paragraph (e)(1) of this section, the debt collector must disclose that the communication is from a debt collector.
(3) Exception. Disclosures under paragraphs (e)(1) and (2) of this section are not required in a formal pleading made in connection with a legal action.
(4) Translated disclosures. A debt collector must make the disclosures required by paragraphs (e)(1) and (2) of this section in the same language or languages used for the rest of the communication in which the debt collector conveyed the disclosures. Any translation of the disclosures a debt collector uses must be complete and accurate.
(f) Assumed names. This section does not prohibit a debt collector's employee from using an assumed name when communicating or attempting to communicate with a person, provided that the employee uses the assumed name consistently and that the debt collector can readily identify any employee using an assumed name.
§1006.22 Unfair or unconscionable means.
(a) In general. A debt collector must not use unfair or unconscionable means to collect or attempt to collect any debt, including, but not limited to, the conduct described in paragraphs (b) through (f) of this section.
(b) Collection of unauthorized amounts. A debt collector must not collect any amount unless such amount is expressly authorized by the agreement creating the debt or permitted by law. For purposes of this paragraph, the term “any amount” includes any interest, fee, charge, or expense incidental to the principal obligation.
(c) Postdated payment instruments. A debt collector must not:
(1) Accept from any person a check or other payment instrument postdated by more than five days unless such person is notified in writing of the debt collector's intent to deposit such check or instrument not more than ten, nor less than three, days (excluding legal public holidays identified in 5 U.S.C. 6103(a), Saturdays, and Sundays) prior to such deposit.
(2) Solicit any postdated check or other postdated payment instrument for the purpose of threatening or instituting criminal prosecution.
(3) Deposit or threaten to deposit any postdated check or other postdated payment instrument prior to the date on such check or instrument.
(d) Charges resulting from concealment of purpose. A debt collector must not cause charges to be made to any person for communications by concealment of the true purpose of the communication. Such charges include, but are not limited to, collect telephone calls and telegram fees.
(e) Nonjudicial action regarding property. A debt collector must not take or threaten to take any nonjudicial action to effect dispossession or disablement of property if:
(1) There is no present right to possession of the property claimed as collateral through an enforceable security interest;
(2) There is no present intention to take possession of the property; or
(3) The property is exempt by law from such dispossession or disablement.
(f) Restrictions on use of certain media. A debt collector must not:
(1) Communicate with a consumer regarding a debt by postcard.
(2) Use any language or symbol, other than the debt collector's address, on any envelope when communicating with a consumer by mail, except that a debt collector may use the debt collector's business name on an envelope if such name does not indicate that the debt collector is in the debt collection business.
(3) Communicate or attempt to communicate with a consumer by sending an email to an email address that the debt collector knows is provided to the consumer by the consumer's employer, unless the email address is one described in §1006.6(d)(4)(i) or (iii).
(4) Communicate or attempt to communicate with a person in connection with the collection of a debt through a social media platform if the communication or attempt to communicate is viewable by the general public or the person's social media contacts.
(g) Safe harbor for certain emails and text messages relating to the collection of a debt. A debt collector who communicates with a consumer by sending an email or text message in accordance with the procedures described in §1006.6(d)(3) does not violate paragraph (a) of this section by revealing in the email or text message the debt collector's name or other information indicating that the communication relates to the collection of a debt.
§1006.26 Collection of time-barred debts.
(a) Definitions. For purposes of this section:
(1) Statute of limitations means the period prescribed by applicable law for bringing a legal action against the consumer to collect a debt.
(2) Time-barred debt means a debt for which the applicable statute of limitations has expired.
(b) Legal actions and threats of legal actions prohibited. A debt collector must not bring or threaten to bring a legal action against a consumer to collect a time-barred debt. This paragraph (b) does not apply to proofs of claim filed in connection with a bankruptcy proceeding.
§1006.30 Other prohibited practices.
(a) Required actions prior to furnishing information.
(1) In general. Except as provided in paragraph (a)(2) of this section, a debt collector must not furnish to a consumer reporting agency, as defined in section 603(f) of the Fair Credit Reporting Act (15 U.S.C. 1681a(f)), information about a debt before the debt collector:
(i) Speaks to the consumer about the debt in person or by telephone; or
(ii) Places a letter in the mail or sends an electronic message to the consumer about the debt and waits a reasonable period of time to receive a notice of undeliverability. During the reasonable period, the debt collector must permit receipt of, and monitor for, notifications of undeliverability from communications providers. If the debt collector receives such a notification during the reasonable period, the debt collector must not furnish information about the debt to a consumer reporting agency until the debt collector otherwise satisfies paragraph (a)(1) of this section.
(2) Special rule-information furnished to certain specialty consumer reporting agencies. Paragraph (a)(1) of this section does not apply to a debt collector's furnishing of information about a debt to a nationwide specialty consumer reporting agency that compiles and maintains information on a consumer's check writing history, as described in section 603(x)(3) of the Fair Credit Reporting Act (15 U.S.C. 1681a(x)(3)).
(b) Prohibition on the sale, transfer for consideration, or placement for collection of certain debts-
(1) In general. Except as provided in paragraph (b)(2) of this section, a debt collector must not sell, transfer for consideration, or place for collection a debt if the debt collector knows or should know that the debt has been paid or settled or discharged in bankruptcy.
(2) Exceptions-
(i) In general. A debt collector may transfer for consideration a debt described in paragraph (b)(1) of this section if the debt collector:
(A) Transfers the debt to the debt's owner;
(B) Transfers the debt to a previous owner of the debt, if the transfer is authorized under the terms of the original contract between the debt collector and the previous owner; or
(C) Transfers the debt as a result of a merger, acquisition, purchase and assumption transaction, or a transfer of substantially all of the debt collector's assets.
(ii) Secured claims in bankruptcy. A debt collector may sell, transfer for consideration, or place for collection a debt that has been discharged in bankruptcy if the debt is secured by an enforceable lien and the debt collector notifies the transferee that the consumer's personal liability for the debt was discharged in bankruptcy.
(iii) Securitizations and pledges of debt. Paragraph (b)(1) of this section does not prohibit the securitization of a debt or the pledging of a portfolio of debt as collateral in connection with a borrowing.
(c) Multiple debts. If a consumer makes any single payment to a debt collector with respect to multiple debts owed by the consumer to the debt collector, the debt collector:
(1) Must not apply the payment to any debt that is disputed by the consumer; and
(2) If applicable, must apply the payment in accordance with the consumer's directions.
(d) Legal actions by debt collectors-
(1) Action to enforce interest in real property. A debt collector who brings a legal action against a consumer to enforce an interest in real property securing the consumer's debt must bring the action only in a judicial district or similar legal entity in which such real property is located.
(2) Other legal actions. A debt collector who brings a legal action against a consumer other than to enforce an interest in real property securing the consumer's debt must bring such action only in the judicial district or similar legal entity in which the consumer:
(i) Signed the contract sued upon; or
(ii) Resides at the commencement of the action.
(3) Authorization of actions. Nothing in this part authorizes debt collectors to bring legal actions.
(e) Furnishing certain deceptive forms. A debt collector must not design, compile, and furnish any form that the debt collector knows would be used to cause a consumer falsely to believe that a person other than the consumer's creditor is participating in collecting or attempting to collect a debt that the consumer allegedly owes to the creditor.
§1006.34 Notice for validation of debts.
(a) Validation information required.
(1) In general. Except as provided in paragraph (a)(2) of this section, a debt collector must provide a consumer with the validation information required by paragraph (c) of this section either:
(i) By sending the consumer a validation notice in the manner required by §1006.42:
(A) In the initial communication, as defined in paragraph (b)(2) of this section; or
(B) Within five days of that initial communication; or
(ii) By providing the validation information orally in the initial communication.
(2) Exception. A debt collector who otherwise would be required to send a validation notice pursuant to paragraph (a)(1)(i)(B) of this section is not required to do so if the consumer has paid the debt prior to the time that paragraph (a)(1)(i)(B) of this section would require the validation notice to be sent.
(b) Definitions. For purposes of this section:
(1) Clear and conspicuous means readily understandable. In the case of written and electronic disclosures, the location and type size also must be readily noticeable and legible to consumers, although no minimum type size is mandated. In the case of oral disclosures, the disclosures also must be given at a volume and speed sufficient for the consumer to hear and comprehend them.
(2) Initial communication means the first time that, in connection with the collection of a debt, a debt collector conveys information, directly or indirectly, regarding the debt to the consumer, other than a communication in the form of a formal pleading in a civil action, or any form or notice that does not relate to the collection of the debt and is expressly required by:
(i) The Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (26 U.S.C. 1 et seq.);
(ii) Title V of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (15 U.S.C. 6801 through 6827); or
(iii) Any provision of Federal or State law or regulation mandating notice of a data security breach or privacy risk.
(3) Itemization date means any one of the following five reference dates for which a debt collector can ascertain the amount of the debt:
(i) The last statement date, which is the date of the last periodic statement or written account statement or invoice provided to the consumer by a creditor;
(ii) The charge-off date, which is the date the debt was charged off;
(iii) The last payment date, which is the date the last payment was applied to the debt;
(iv) The transaction date, which is the date of the transaction that gave rise to the debt; or
(v) The judgment date, which is the date of a final court judgment that determines the amount of the debt owed by the consumer.
(4) Validation notice means a written or electronic notice that provides the validation information required by paragraph (c) of this section.
(5) Validation period means the period starting on the date that a debt collector provides the validation information required by paragraph (c) of this section and ending 30 days after the consumer receives or is assumed to receive the validation information. For purposes of determining the end of the validation period, the debt collector may assume that a consumer receives the validation information on any date that is at least five days (excluding legal public holidays identified in 5 U.S.C. 6103(a), Saturdays, and Sundays) after the debt collector provides it.
(c) Validation information. Pursuant to paragraph (a)(1) of this section, a debt collector must provide the following validation information.
(1) Debt collector communication disclosure. The statement required by §1006.18(e).
(2) Information about the debt. Except as provided in paragraph (c)(5) of this section:
(i) The debt collector's name and the mailing address at which the debt collector accepts disputes and requests for original-creditor information.
(ii) The consumer's name and mailing address.
(iii) If the debt collector is collecting a debt related to a consumer financial product or service as defined in §1006.2(f), the name of the creditor to whom the debt was owed on the itemization date.
(iv) The account number, if any, associated with the debt on the itemization date, or a truncated version of that number.
(v) The name of the creditor to whom the debt currently is owed.
(vi) The itemization date.
(vii) The amount of the debt on the itemization date.
(viii) An itemization of the current amount of the debt reflecting interest, fees, payments, and credits since the itemization date. A debt collector may disclose the itemization on a separate page provided in the same communication with a validation notice, if the debt collector includes on the validation notice, where the itemization would have appeared, a statement referring to that separate page.
(ix) The current amount of the debt.
(3) Information about consumer protections.
(i) The date that the debt collector will consider the end date of the validation period and a statement that, if the consumer notifies the debt collector in writing on or before that date that the debt, or any portion of the debt, is disputed, the debt collector must cease collection of the debt, or the disputed portion of the debt, until the debt collector sends the consumer either verification of the debt or a copy of a judgment.
(ii) The date that the debt collector will consider the end date of the validation period and a statement that, if the consumer requests in writing on or before that date the name and address of the original creditor, the debt collector must cease collection of the debt until the debt collector sends the consumer the name and address of the original creditor, if different from the current creditor.
(iii) The date that the debt collector will consider the end date of the validation period and a statement that, unless the consumer contacts the debt collector to dispute the validity of the debt, or any portion of the debt, on or before that date, the debt collector will assume that the debt is valid.
(iv) If the debt collector is collecting debt related to a consumer financial product or service as defined in §1006.2(f), a statement that informs the consumer that additional information regarding consumer protections in debt collection is available on the Bureau's website at www.cfpb.gov/debt-collection.
(v) If the debt collector sends the validation notice electronically, a statement explaining how a consumer can, as described in paragraphs (c)(4)(i) and (ii) of this section, dispute the debt or request original-creditor information electronically.
(4) Consumer-response information. The following information, segregated from the validation information required by paragraphs (c)(1) through (3) of this section and from any optional information included pursuant to paragraphs (d)(3)(i), (ii), (iii)(A), (iv), (v), (vi)(A), (vii), and (viii) of this section, and, if provided on a validation notice, located at the bottom of the notice under the headings, “How do you want to respond?” and “Check all that apply:”:
(i) Dispute prompts. The following statements, listed in the following order, and using the following phrasing or substantially similar phrasing, each next to a prompt:
(A) “I want to dispute the debt because I think:”;
(B) “This is not my debt.”;
(C) “The amount is wrong.”; and
(D) “Other (please describe on reverse or attach additional information).”
(ii) Original-creditor information prompt. The statement, “I want you to send me the name and address of the original creditor.”, using that phrase or a substantially similar phrase, next to a prompt.
(iii) Mailing addresses. Mailing addresses for the consumer and the debt collector, which are the debt collector's and the consumer's names and mailing addresses as disclosed pursuant to §1006.34(c)(2)(i) and (ii).
(5) Special rule for certain residential mortgage debt. For residential mortgage debt, if a periodic statement is required under Regulation Z, 12 CFR 1026.41, at the time a debt collector provides the validation notice, a debt collector need not provide the validation information required by paragraphs (c)(2)(vi) through (viii) of this section if the debt collector:
(i) Provides the consumer, in the same communication with the validation notice, a copy of the most recent periodic statement provided to the consumer under Regulation Z, 12 CFR 1026.41(b); and
(ii) Includes on the validation notice, where the validation information required by paragraphs (c)(2)(vi) through (viii) of this section would have appeared, a statement referring to that periodic statement.
(d) Form of validation information.
(1) In general. The validation information required by paragraph (c) of this section must be clear and conspicuous.
(2) Safe harbor.
(i) In general. Model Form B-1 in appendix B to this part contains the validation information required by paragraph (c) of this section and certain optional disclosures permitted by paragraph (d)(3) of this section. A debt collector who uses Model Form B-1 complies with the information and form requirements of paragraphs (c) and (d)(1) of this section, including if the debt collector:
(A) Omits any or all of the optional disclosures shown on Model Form B-1; or
(B) Adds any or all of the optional disclosures described in paragraph (d)(3) of this section that are not shown on Model Form B-1, provided that any such optional disclosures are no more prominent than any of the validation information required by paragraph (c) of this section.
(ii) Certain disclosures on a separate page. A debt collector who uses Model Form B-1 as described in paragraph (d)(2)(i) of this section and who, pursuant to paragraphs (c)(2)(viii) or (5) of this section, includes certain disclosures on a separate page in the same communication with the validation notice and, on the notice, the required statement referring to those disclosures, receives a safe harbor for compliance with the information and form requirements of paragraphs (c) and (d)(1) of this section except with respect to the disclosures on the separate page.
(iii) Substantially similar form. A debt collector who uses Model Form B-1 as described in paragraphs (d)(2)(i) or (ii) of this section may make changes to the form and retain a safe harbor for compliance with the information and form requirements of paragraphs (c) and (d)(1) of this section provided that the form remains substantially similar to Model Form B-1.
(3) Optional disclosures. A debt collector may include any of the following information when providing the validation information required by paragraph (c) of this section. A debt collector who includes any of the following information receives the safe harbor described in paragraph (d)(2) of this section, provided that the debt collector otherwise uses Model Form B-1 in appendix B to this part, or a variation of Model Form B-1, as described in paragraph (d)(2) of this section.
(i) Telephone contact information. The debt collector's telephone contact information.
(ii) Reference code. A number or code that the debt collector uses to identify the debt or the consumer.
(iii) Payment disclosures. Either or both of the following phrases:
(A) The statement, “Contact us about your payment options.”, using that phrase or a substantially similar phrase; and
(B) Below the consumer-response information required by paragraphs (c)(4)(i) and (ii) of this section, the statement, “I enclosed this amount:”, using that phrase or a substantially similar phrase, payment instructions after that statement, and a prompt.
(iv) Disclosures under applicable law.
(A) Disclosures on the reverse of the validation notice. On the reverse of the validation notice, any disclosures that are specifically required by, or that provide safe harbors under, applicable law and, if any such disclosures are included, a statement on the front of the validation notice referring to those disclosures. Any such disclosures must not appear directly on the reverse of the consumer-response information required by paragraph (c)(4) of this section.
(B) Disclosures on the front of the validation notice. If a debt collector is collecting time-barred debt, on the front of the validation notice below the disclosure required by paragraph (c)(2)(ix) of this section, any time-barred debt disclosure that is specifically required by, or that provides a safe harbor under, applicable law, provided that applicable law specifies the content of the disclosure.
(v) Information about electronic communications. The following information:
(A) The debt collector's website and email address.
(B) If the validation information is not provided electronically, a statement explaining how a consumer can, as described in paragraphs (c)(4)(i) and (ii) of this section, dispute the debt or request original-creditor information electronically.
(vi) Spanish-language translation disclosures. Either or both of the following disclosures regarding a consumer's ability to request a Spanish-language translation of a validation notice:
(A) The statement, “Póngase en contacto con nosotros para solicitar una copia de este formulario en español” (which means “Contact us to request a copy of this form in Spanish”), using that phrase or a substantially similar phrase in Spanish. If providing this optional disclosure, a debt collector may include supplemental information in Spanish that specifies how a consumer may request a Spanish-language validation notice.
(B) With the consumer-response information required by paragraph (c)(4) of this section, the statement “Quiero este formulario en español” (which means “I want this form in Spanish”), using that phrase or a substantially similar phrase in Spanish, next to a prompt.
(vii) The merchant brand, affinity brand, or facility name, if any, associated with the debt.
(viii) If a debt collector is collecting debt other than debt related to a consumer financial product or service as defined in §1006.2(f), the information specified in paragraphs (c)(2)(iii) or (c)(3)(iv) of this section.
(4) Validation notices delivered electronically. If a debt collector delivers a validation notice electronically, a debt collector may, at its option, format the validation notice as follows:
(i) Prompts. Any prompt required by paragraphs (c)(4)(i) or (ii) or paragraphs (d)(3)(iii)(B) or (vi)(B) of this section may be displayed electronically as a fillable field.
(ii) Hyperlinks. Hyperlinks may be embedded that, when clicked:
(A) Connect a consumer to the debt collector's website;
(B) Connect a consumer to the Bureau's debt collection website as disclosed pursuant to paragraph (c)(3)(iv) of this section; or
(C) Permit a consumer to respond to the dispute and original-creditor information prompts required by paragraphs (c)(4)(i) and (ii) of this section.
(e) Translation into other languages.
(1) In general. A debt collector may send a consumer a validation notice completely and accurately translated into any language if the debt collector:
(i) Sends the consumer an English-language validation notice in the same communication as the translated validation notice; or
(ii) Previously provided the consumer an English-language validation notice, in which case the debt collector need not send the consumer an English-language validation notice in the same communication as the translated validation notice.
(2) Spanish-language validation notice-requirement to provide after optional disclosure. A debt collector who includes in the validation information either or both of the optional disclosures described in paragraph (d)(3)(vi) of this section, and who thereafter receives a request from the consumer for a Spanish-language validation notice, must provide the consumer a validation notice completely and accurately translated into Spanish.
§1006.38 Disputes and requests for original-creditor information.
(a) Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following definitions apply:
(1) Duplicative dispute means a dispute submitted by the consumer in writing within the validation period that:
(i) Is substantially the same as a dispute previously submitted by the consumer in writing within the validation period for which the debt collector already has satisfied the requirements of paragraph (d)(2)(i) of this section; and
(ii) Does not include new and material information to support the dispute.
(2) Validation period has the same meaning given to it in §1006.34(b)(5).
(b) Overshadowing of rights to dispute or request original-creditor information.
(1) Prohibition. During the validation period, a debt collector must not engage in any collection activities or communications that overshadow or are inconsistent with the disclosure of the consumer's rights to dispute the debt and to request the name and address of the original creditor.
(2) Safe harbor. A debt collector who uses Model Form B-1 in appendix B to this part in a manner described in §1006.34(d)(2) has not thereby violated paragraph (b)(1) of this section.
(c) Requests for original-creditor information. Upon receipt of a request for the name and address of the original creditor submitted by the consumer in writing within the validation period, a debt collector must cease collection of the debt until the debt collector:
(1) In general. Sends the name and address of the original creditor to the consumer in writing or electronically in the manner required by §1006.42; or
(2) Special rule if the current creditor and the original creditor are the same. In lieu of taking the actions described in paragraph (c)(1) of this section, reasonably determines that the original creditor is the same as the current creditor, notifies the consumer of that fact in writing or electronically in the manner required by §1006.42, and refers the consumer to the validation information previously provided pursuant to §1006.34(a)(1).
(d) Disputes-
(1) Failure to dispute. The failure of a consumer to dispute the validity of a debt does not constitute a legal admission of liability by the consumer.
(2) Response to disputes. Upon receipt of a dispute submitted by the consumer in writing within the validation period, a debt collector must cease collection of the debt, or any disputed portion of the debt, until the debt collector:
(i) Sends a copy either of verification of the debt or of a judgment to the consumer in writing or electronically in the manner required by §1006.42; or
(ii) In the case of a dispute that the debt collector reasonably determines is a duplicative dispute, either:
(A) Notifies the consumer in writing or electronically in the manner required by §1006.42(a)(1) that the dispute is duplicative, provides a brief statement of the reasons for the determination, and refers the consumer to the debt collector's response to the earlier dispute; or
(B) Satisfies paragraph (d)(2)(i) of this section.
§1006.42 Sending required disclosures.
(a) Sending required disclosures-
(1) In general. A debt collector who sends disclosures required by the Act and this part in writing or electronically must do so in a manner that is reasonably expected to provide actual notice, and in a form that the consumer may keep and access later.
(2) Exceptions. A debt collector need not comply with paragraph (a)(1) of this section when sending the disclosure required by §1006.6(e) or §1006.18(e) in writing or electronically, unless the disclosure is included on a notice required by §1006.34(a)(1)(i) or §1006.38(c) or (d)(2).
(b) Requirements for certain disclosures sent electronically. To comply with paragraph (a) of this section, a debt collector who sends the notice required by §1006.34(a)(1)(i)(B), or the disclosures described in §1006.38(c) or (d)(2)(i), electronically must do so in accordance with section 101(c) of the Electronic Signatures in Global and National Commerce Act (E-SIGN Act) (15 U.S.C. 7001(c)).
§1006.100 Record retention.
(a) In general. Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, a debt collector must retain records that are evidence of compliance or noncompliance with the FDCPA and this part starting on the date that the debt collector begins collection activity on a debt until three years after the debt collector's last collection activity on the debt.
(b) Special rule for telephone call recordings. If a debt collector records telephone calls made in connection with the collection of a debt, the debt collector must retain the recording of each such telephone call for three years after the date of the call.
§1006.104 Relation to State laws.
Neither the Act nor the corresponding provisions of this part annul, alter, affect, or exempt any person subject to the provisions of the Act or the corresponding provisions of this part from complying with the laws of any State with respect to debt collection practices, except to the extent that those laws are inconsistent with any provision of the Act or the corresponding provisions of this part, and then only to the extent of the inconsistency. For purposes of this section, a State law is not inconsistent with the Act or the corresponding provisions of this part if the protection such law affords any consumer is greater than the protection provided by the Act or the corresponding provisions of this part.
§1006.108 Exemption for State regulation.
(a) Exemption for State regulation. Any State may apply to the Bureau for a determination that, under the laws of that State, any class of debt collection practices within that State is subject to requirements that are substantially similar to those imposed under sections 803 through 812 of the Act (15 U.S.C. 1692a through 1692j) and the corresponding provisions of this part, and that there is adequate provision for State enforcement of such requirements.
(b) Procedures and criteria. The procedures and criteria whereby States may apply to the Bureau for exemption of a class of debt collection practices within the applying State from the provisions of the Act and the corresponding provisions of this part as provided in section 817 of the Act (15 U.S.C. 1692o) are set forth in appendix A of this part.
Appendix A to Part 1006-Procedures for State Application for Exemption from the Provisions of the Act
I. Purpose and Definitions
(a) This appendix establishes procedures and criteria whereby States may apply to the Bureau for exemption of a class of debt collection practices within the applying State from the provisions of the Act and the corresponding provisions of this part as provided in section 817 of the Act (15 U.S.C. 1692o).
(b) For purposes of this appendix:
(1) Applicant State law means the State law that, for a class of debt collection practices within that State, is claimed to contain requirements that are substantially similar to the requirements that relevant Federal law imposes on that class of debt collection practices, and that contains adequate provision for State enforcement.
(2) Class of debt collection practices includes one or more such classes of debt collection practices referred to in paragraph I(b)(1) of this appendix.
(3) Relevant Federal law means sections 803 through 812 of the Act (15 U.S.C. 1692a through 1692j) and the corresponding provisions of this part.
(4) State law includes State statutes, any regulations that implement State statutes, and formal interpretations of State statutes or regulations by a court of competent jurisdiction or duly authorized State agency.
II. Application
Any State may apply to the Bureau pursuant to the terms of this appendix for a determination that the applicant State law contains requirements that, for a class of debt collection practices within that State, are substantially similar to the requirements that relevant Federal law imposes on that class of debt collection practices, and that the applicant State law contains adequate provision for State enforcement. The application must be in writing, addressed to the Assistant Director, Office of Regulations, Division of Research, Monitoring, and Regulations, Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection, 1700 G Street, NW, Washington, DC 20552, signed by the Governor, Attorney General, or State official having primary enforcement responsibility under the State law that applies to the class of debt collection practices, and must be supported by the documents specified in this appendix.
III. Supporting Documents
The application must be accompanied by the following, which may be submitted in paper or electronic form:
(a) A copy of the applicant State law.
(b) A comparison of each provision of relevant Federal law with the corresponding provisions of the applicant State law, together with reasons supporting the claim that the corresponding provisions of the applicant State law are substantially similar to the provisions of relevant Federal law, and an explanation as to why any differences between the State statute or regulation and Federal law are not inconsistent with the provisions of relevant Federal law and do not result in a diminution in the protection otherwise afforded consumers; and a statement that no other State laws (including administrative or judicial interpretations) are related to, or would have an effect upon, the State law that is being considered by the Bureau in making its determination.
(c) A comparison of the provisions of the State law that provide for enforcement with the provisions of section 814 of the Act (15 U.S.C. 1692l), together with reasons supporting the claim that the applicant State law provides for adequate administrative enforcement.
(d) A statement identifying the office designated or to be designated to enforce the applicant State law. The statement must show how the office provides for adequate enforcement of the applicant State law, including by showing that the office has necessary facilities, personnel, and funding. The statement must include, for example, complete information regarding the fiscal arrangements for administrative enforcement (including the amount of funds available or to be provided), the number and qualifications of personnel engaged or to be engaged in enforcement, and a description of the procedures under which the applicant State law is to be enforced by the State.
IV. Criteria for Determination
The Bureau will consider the criteria set forth below, and any other relevant information, in determining whether the applicant State law is substantially similar to relevant Federal law and whether there is adequate provision for enforcement of the applicant State law. In making that determination, the Bureau primarily will consider each provision of the applicant State law in comparison with each corresponding provision in relevant Federal law, and not the State law as a whole in comparison with the Act as a whole.
(a)
(1) In order for the applicant State law to be substantially similar to relevant Federal law, the applicant State law at least must provide that:
(i) Definitions and rules of construction, as applicable, import a meaning and have an application that are substantially similar to those prescribed by relevant Federal law.
(ii) Debt collectors provide all of the applicable notices required by relevant Federal law, with the content and in the terminology, form, and time periods prescribed pursuant to relevant Federal law. The Bureau may determine whether additional notice requirements under the applicant State law affect a determination that the applicant State law is substantially similar to relevant Federal law.
(iii) Debt collectors take all affirmative actions and abide by obligations substantially similar to those prescribed by relevant Federal law under substantially similar conditions and within substantially similar time periods as are prescribed under relevant Federal law;
(iv) Debt collectors abide by prohibitions that are substantially similar to those prescribed by relevant Federal law;
(v) Consumers' obligations or responsibilities are no more costly, lengthy, or burdensome than consumers' corresponding obligations or responsibilities under relevant Federal law; and
(vi) Consumers' rights and protections are substantially similar to those provided by relevant Federal law under conditions or within time periods that are substantially similar to those prescribed by relevant Federal law.
(2) In applying the criteria set forth in paragraph IV(a)(1) of this appendix, the Bureau will not consider adversely any additional requirements of State law that are not inconsistent with the purpose of the Act or the requirements imposed under relevant Federal law.
(b) In determining whether provisions for enforcement of the applicant State law are adequate, consideration will be given to the extent to which, under the applicant State law, provision is made for administrative enforcement, including necessary facilities, personnel, and funding.
V. Public Comment
In connection with any application that has been filed in accordance with the requirements of parts II and III of this appendix and following initial review of the application, a proposed rule concerning the application for exemption will be published by the Bureau in the Federal Register, and a copy of such application will be made available for examination by interested persons during business hours at the Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection, 1700 G Street, NW, Washington, DC 20552. A comment period will be allowed from the date of such publication for interested parties to submit written comments to the Bureau regarding that application.
VI. Exemption from Requirements
If the Bureau determines on the basis of the information before it that, under the applicant State law, a class of debt collection practices is subject to requirements substantially similar to those imposed under relevant Federal law and that there is adequate provision for State enforcement, the Bureau will exempt the class of debt collection practices in that State from the requirements of relevant Federal law and section 814 of the Act in the following manner and subject to the following conditions:
(a) A final rule granting the exemption will be published in the Federal Register, and the Bureau will furnish a copy of such rule to the State official who made application for such exemption, to each Federal authority responsible for administrative enforcement of the requirements of relevant Federal law, and to the Attorney General of the United States. Any exemption granted will be effective 90 days after the date of publication of such rule in the Federal Register.
(b) Any State that receives an exemption must, through its appropriate official, take the following steps:
(i) Inform the Assistant Director, Office of Regulations, Division of Research, Monitoring, and Regulations, Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection, 1700 G Street, NW, Washington, DC 20552 in writing within 30 days of any change in the applicant State law. The report of any such change must contain copies of the full text of that change, together with statements setting forth the information and opinions regarding that change that are specified in paragraph III.
(ii) Provide, not later than two years after the date the exemption is granted, and every two years thereafter, a report to the Bureau in writing concerning the manner in which the State has enforced the applicant State law in the preceding two years and an update of the information required under paragraph III(d) of this appendix.
(c) The Bureau will inform any State that receives such an exemption, through its appropriate official, of any subsequent amendments of the Act or this part that might necessitate the amendment of State law for the exemption to continue.
(d) After an exemption is granted, the requirements of the applicable State law constitute the requirements of relevant Federal law, except to the extent such State law imposes requirements not imposed by the Act or this part.
VII. Adverse Determination
(a) If, after publication of a proposed rule in the Federal Register as provided under part V of this appendix, the Bureau finds on the basis of the information before it that it cannot make a favorable determination in connection with the application, the Bureau will notify the appropriate State official of the facts upon which such findings are based and will afford that State authority a reasonable opportunity to submit additional materials that demonstrate the basis for granting an exemption.
(b) If, after having afforded the State authority such opportunity to demonstrate the basis for granting an exemption, the Bureau finds on the basis of the information before it that it still cannot make a favorable determination in connection with the application, the Bureau will publish in the Federal Register a final rule containing its determination regarding the application and will furnish a copy of such rule to the State official who made application for such exemption.
VIII. Revocation of Exemption
(a) The Bureau reserves the right to revoke any exemption granted under the provisions of the Act or this part, if at any time it determines that the State law does not, in fact, impose requirements that are substantially similar to relevant Federal law or that there is not, in fact, adequate provision for State enforcement.
(b) Before revoking any such exemption, the Bureau will notify the State of the facts or conduct that, in the Bureau's opinion, warrant such revocation, and will afford that State such opportunity as the Bureau deems appropriate in the circumstances to demonstrate continued eligibility for an exemption.
(c) If, after having been afforded the opportunity to demonstrate or achieve compliance, the Bureau determines that the State has not done so, a proposed rule to revoke such exemption will be published in the Federal Register. A comment period will be allowed from the date of such publication for interested persons to submit written comments to the Bureau regarding the intention to revoke.
(d) If such exemption is revoked, a final rule revoking the exemption will be published by the Bureau in the Federal Register, and a copy of such rule will be furnished to the State, to the Federal authorities responsible for enforcement of the requirements of the Act, and to the Attorney General of the United States. The revocation becomes effective, and the class of debt collection practices affected within that State become subject to the requirements of sections 803 through 812 of the Act and the corresponding provisions of this part, 90 days after the date of publication of the final rule in the Federal Register.
Appendix B to Part 1006-Model Forms.
B-1 Model Form for Validation Notice
Appendix C to Part 1006-Issuance of Advisory Opinions
1. Advisory opinions. Any act done or omitted in good faith in conformity with any advisory opinion issued by the Bureau, including advisory opinions referenced in this appendix, provides the protection afforded under section 813(e) of the Act. The Bureau will amend this appendix periodically to incorporate references to advisory opinions that the Bureau issues.
2. Requests for issuance of advisory opinions. A request for an advisory opinion may be submitted in accordance with the instructions regarding submission and content of requests applicable to any relevant advisory opinion program that the Bureau offers. Requests for advisory opinions will be reviewed consistent with the process outlined in any such program, and any resulting advisory opinions will be published in the Federal Register and on consumerfinance.gov.
3. Bureau-issued advisory opinions. The Bureau has issued the following advisory opinions:
a. Safe Harbors from Liability under the Fair Debt Collection Practices Act for Certain Actions Taken in Compliance with Mortgage Servicing Rules under the Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act (Regulation X) and the Truth in Lending Act (Regulation Z), 81 FR 71977 (Oct. 19, 2016).
