§1010.1 Definitions.
(a) Statutory terms. All terms are used in accordance with their statutory meaning in 15 U.S.C. 1701, unless otherwise defined in paragraph (b) of this section or elsewhere in this part.
(b) Other terms. As used in this part:
Act means the Interstate Land Sales Full Disclosure Act, 15 U.S.C. 1701.
Advisory opinion means the formal written opinion of the Director as to jurisdiction in a particular case or the applicability of an exemption under §§1010.5 through 1010.15, based on facts submitted to the Director.
Available for use means that in addition to being constructed, the subject facility is fully operative and supplied with any materials and staff necessary for its intended purpose.
Beneficial property restrictions means restrictions that are enforceable by the lot owners and are designed to control the use of the lot and to preserve or enhance the environment and the aesthetic and economic value of the subdivision.
Date of filing means the date a Statement of Record, amendment, or consolidation, accompanied by the applicable fee, is received by the Director.
Good faith estimate means an estimate based on documentary evidence. In the case of cost estimates, the documentation may be obtained from the suppliers of the services. In the case of estimates of completion dates, the documentation may be actual contracts let, engineering schedules, or other evidence of commitments to complete the amenities.
ILSRP means the Interstate Land Sales Registration Program.
Lot means any portion, piece, division, unit, or undivided interest in land located in any state or foreign country, if the interest includes the right to the exclusive use of a specific portion of the land.
Owner means the person or entity who holds the fee title to the land and has the power to convey that title to others.
Parent corporation means that entity which ultimately controls the subsidiary, even though the control may arise through any series or chain of other subsidiaries or entities.
Principal means any person or entity holding at least a 10 percent financial or ownership interest in the developer or owner, directly or through any series or chain of subsidiaries or other entities.
Rules means all rules adopted pursuant to the Act, including the general requirements published in this part.
Sale means any obligation or arrangement for consideration to purchase or lease a lot directly or indirectly. The terms “sale” or “seller” include in their meanings the terms “lease” and “lessor”.
Senior Executive Officer means the individual of highest rank responsible for the day-to-day operations of the developer and who has the authority to bind or commit the developing entity to contractual obligations.
Site means a group of contiguous lots, whether such lots are actually divided or proposed to be divided. Lots are considered to be contiguous even though contiguity may be interrupted by a road, park, small body of water, recreational facility, or any similar object.
Start of construction means breaking ground for building a facility, followed by diligent action to complete the facility.
§1010.2 [Reserved]
§1010.3 General applicability.
Except in the case of an exempt transaction, a developer may not sell or lease lots in a subdivision, making use of any means or instruments of transportation or communication in interstate commerce, or of the mails, unless a Statement of Record is in effect in accordance with the provisions of this part. In non-exempt transactions, the developer must give each purchaser a printed Property Report, meeting the requirements of this part, in advance of the purchaser's signing of any contract or agreement for sale or lease. Information collection requirements contained in this part have been approved by the Office of Management and Budget under the provisions of 44 U.S.C. 3501 et seq. and have been assigned OMB Control No. 3170-0012.
§1010.4 Exemptions-general.
(a) The exemptions available under §§1010.5 through 1010.16 are not applicable when the method of sale, lease or other disposition of land or an interest in land is adopted for the purpose of evasion of the Act.
(b) With the exception of the sales or leases which are exempt under §1010.5, the anti-fraud provisions of the Act (15 U.S.C. 1703(a)(2)) apply to exempt transactions. The anti-fraud provisions make it unlawful for a developer or agent to employ any device, scheme, or artifice to:
(1) Defraud;
(2) To obtain money or property by means of any untrue statement of a material fact, or
(3) To omit to state a material fact necessary in order to make the statements made not misleading, with respect to any information pertinent to the lot or subdivision; or
(4) To engage in any transaction, practice, or course of business which operates or would operate as a fraud or deceit upon a purchaser.
(c) The anti-fraud provisions of the Act require that certain representations be included in the contract in transactions which are not exempt under §1010.5. Specifically, the Act requires that if a developer or agent represents that roads, sewers, water, gas or electric service or recreational amenities will be provided or completed by the developer, the contract must stipulate that the services or amenities will be provided or completed.
(d) Eligibility for exemptions available under §§1010.5 through 1010.14 is self-determining. With the exception of the exemptions available under §§1010.15 and 1010.16, a developer is not required to file notice with or obtain the approval of the Director in order to take advantage of an exemption. If a developer elects to take advantage of an exemption, the developer is responsible for maintaining records to demonstrate that the requirements of the exemption have been met.
(e) A developer may present evidence, or otherwise discuss, in an informal hearing before the Office of Supervision Examinations, the Bureau's position on the jurisdiction or non-exempt status of a particular subdivision.
§1010.5 Statutory exemptions.
A listing of the statutory exemptions is contained in 15 U.S.C. 1702. In accordance with 15 U.S.C. 1702(a)(2), if the sale involves a condominium or multi-unit construction, a presale clause conditioning the sale of a unit on a certain percentage of sales of other units is permissible if it is legally binding on the parties and is for a period not to exceed 180 days. However, the 180-day provision cannot extend the 2-year period for performance. The permissible 180 days is calculated from the date the first purchaser signs a sales contract in the project or, if a phased project, from the date the first purchaser signs the first sales contract in each phase.
§1010.6 One hundred lot exemption.
The sale of lots in a subdivision is exempt from the registration requirements of the Act if, since April 28, 1969, the subdivision has contained fewer than 100 lots, exclusive of lots which are exempt from jurisdiction under §1010.5. In the sale of lots in the subdivision that are not exempt under §1010.5, the developer must comply with the Act's anti-fraud provisions, set forth in §1010.4(b) and (c).
§1010.7 Twelve lot exemption.
(a) The sale of lots is exempt from the registration requirements of the Act if, beginning with the first sale after June 20, 1980, no more than twelve lots in the subdivision are sold in the subsequent twelve-month period. Thereafter, the sale of the first twelve lots is exempt from the registration requirements if no more than twelve lots were sold in each previous twelve month period which began with the anniversary date of the first sale after June 20, 1980.
(b) A developer may apply to the Director to establish a different twelve month period for use in determining eligibility for the exemption and the Director may allow the change if it is for good cause and consistent with the purpose of this section.
(c) In determining eligibility for this exemption, all lots sold or leased in the subdivision after June 20, 1980, are counted, whether or not the transactions are otherwise exempt. Sales or leases made prior to June 21, 1980, are not considered in determining eligibility for the exemption.
(d) The sale must also comply with the anti-fraud provisions of §1010.4(b) and (c) of this part.
§1010.8 Scattered site subdivisions.
(a) The sale of lots in a subdivision consisting of noncontiguous parts is exempt from the registration requirements of the Act if:
(1) Each noncontiguous part of the subdivision contains twenty or fewer lots; and
(2) Each purchaser or purchaser's spouse makes a personal, on-the-lot inspection of the lot purchased prior to signing a contract.
(b) For purposes of this exemption, interruptions such as roads, parks, small bodies of water or recreational facilities do not serve to break the contiguity of parts of a subdivision.
(c) The sale must also comply with the anti-fraud provisions of §1010.4(b) and (c) of this part.
§1010.9 Twenty acre lots.
(a) The sale of lots in a subdivision is exempt from the registration requirements of the Act if, since April 28, 1969, each lot in the subdivision has contained at least twenty acres. In determining eligibility for the exemption, easements for ingress and egress or public utilities are considered part of the total acreage of the lot if the purchaser retains ownership of the property affected by the easement.
(b) The sale must also comply with the anti-fraud provisions of §1010.4(b) and (c) of this part.
§1010.10 Single-family residence exemption.
(a) General. The sale of a lot which meets the requirements specified under paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section is exempt from the registration requirements of the Act.
(b) Subdivision requirements.
(1) The subdivision must meet all local codes and standards.
(2) In the promotion of the subdivision there must be no offers, by direct mail or telephone solicitation, of gifts, trips, dinners or use of similar promotional techniques to induce prospective purchasers to visit the subdivision or to purchase a lot.
(c) Lot requirements.
(1) The lot must be located within a municipality or county where a unit of local government or the state specifies minimum standards in the following areas for the development of subdivision lots taking place within its boundaries:
(i) Lot dimensions.
(ii) Plat approval and recordation.
(iii) Roads and access.
(iv) Drainage.
(v) Flooding.
(vi) Water supply.
(vii) Sewage disposal.
(2) Each lot sold under the exemption must be either zoned for single-family residences or, in the absence of a zoning ordinance, limited exclusively by enforceable covenants or restrictions to single-family residences. Manufactured homes, townhouses, and residences for one-to-four family use are considered single-family residences for purposes of this exemption provision.
(3) The lot must be situated on a paved street or highway which has been built to standards established by the state or the unit of local government in which the subdivision is located. If the roads are to be public roads they must be acceptable to the unit of local government that will be responsible for maintenance. If the street or highway is not complete, the developer must post a bond or other surety acceptable to the municipality or county in the full amount of the cost of completing the street or highway to assure completion to local standards. For purposes of this exemption, paved means concrete or pavement with a bituminous surface that is impervious to water, protects the base and is durable under the traffic load and maintenance contemplated.
(4) The unit of local government or a homeowners association must have accepted or be obligated to accept the responsibility for maintaining the street or highway upon which the lot is situated. In any case in which a homeowners association has accepted or is obligated to accept maintenance responsibility, the developer must, prior to signing of a contract or agreement to purchase, provide the purchaser with a good faith written estimate of the cost of carrying out the responsibility over the first ten years of ownership.
(5) At the time of closing, potable water, sanitary sewage disposal, and electricity must be extended to the lot or the unit of local government must be obligated to install the facilities within 180 days following closing. For subdivisions which will not have a central water or sewage disposal system, there must be assurances that an adequate potable water supply is available year-round and that the lot is approved for the installation of a septic tank.
(6) The contract of sale must require delivery within 180 days after the signing of the sales contract of a warranty deed, which at the time of delivery is free from monetary liens and encumbrances. If a warranty deed is not commonly used in the jurisdiction where the lot is located, a deed or grant which warrants that the seller has not conveyed the lot to another person may be delivered in lieu of a warranty deed. The deed or grant used must warrant that the lot is free from encumbrances made by the seller or any other person claiming by, through, or under the seller.
(7) At the time of closing, a title insurance binder or title opinion reflecting the condition of title must be in existence and issued or presented to the purchaser showing that, subject only to exceptions which are approved in writing by the purchaser at the time of closing, marketable title to the lot is vested in the seller.
(8) The purchaser or purchaser's spouse must make a personal, on-the-lot inspection of the lot purchased prior to signing a contract or agreement to purchase.
(d) The sale must also comply with the anti-fraud provisions of §1010.4(b) and (c) of this part.
§1010.11 Manufactured home exemption.
(a) The sale of a lot is exempt from the registration requirements of the Act when the following eligibility requirements are met:
(1) The lot is sold as a homesite by one party and a manufactured home is sold by another party and the contracts of sale:
(i) Obligate the sellers to perform, contingent upon the other seller carrying out its obligations so that a completed manufactured home will be erected on a completed homesite within two years after the date the purchaser signed the contract to purchase the lot;
(ii) Provide that all funds received by the sellers are to be deposited in escrow accounts independent of the sellers until the transactions are completed;
(iii) Provide that funds received by the sellers will be released to the buyer upon demand if the lot on which the manufactured home has been erected is not conveyed within two years; and
(iv) Contain no provisions which restrict the purchaser's remedy of bringing suit for specific performance.
(2) The homesite is developed in conformance with all local codes and standards, if any, for manufactured home subdivisions.
(3) At the time of closing:
(i) Potable water and sanitary sewage disposal are available to the homesite and electricity has been extended to the lot line;
(ii) The homesite is accessible by roads;
(iii) The purchaser receives marketable title to the lot; and
(iv) Other common facilities represented in any manner by the developer or agent to be provided are completed or there are letters of credit, cash escrows or surety bonds in the form acceptable to the local government in an amount equal to 100 percent of the estimated cost of completion. Corporate bonds are not acceptable for purposes of the exemption.
(4) For purposes of this section, a manufactured home is a unit receiving a label in conformance with U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) regulations implementing the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. 5401).
(b) The sale must also comply with the anti-fraud provisions of §1010.4(b) and (c) of this part.
§1010.12 Intrastate exemption.
(a) Eligibility requirements. The sale of a lot is exempt from the registration requirements of the Act if the following requirements are met:
(1) The sale of lots in the subdivision after December 20, 1979, is restricted solely to residents of the state in which the subdivision is located unless the sale is exempt under §1010.5, §1010.11, or §1010.13.
(2) The purchaser or purchaser's spouse makes a personal on-the-lot inspection of the lot to be purchased before signing a contract.
(3) Each contract:
(i) Specifies the developer's and purchaser's responsibilities for providing and maintaining roads, water and sewer facilities and any existing or promised amenities;
(ii) Contains a good faith estimate of the year in which the roads, water and sewer facilities and promised amenities will be completed; and
(iii) Contains a non-waivable provision giving the purchaser the opportunity to revoke the contract until at least midnight of the seventh calendar day following the date the purchaser signed the contract. If the purchaser is entitled to a longer revocation period by operation of state law, that period becomes the Federal revocation period and the contract must reflect the requirements of the longer period.
(4) The lot being sold is free and clear of all liens, encumbrances and adverse claims except the following:
(i) Mortgages or deeds of trust which contain release provisions for the individual lot purchased if:
(A) The contract of sale obligates the developer to deliver, within 180 days, a warranty deed (or its equivalent under local law), which at the time of delivery is free from any monetary liens or encumbrances; and
(B) The purchaser's payments are deposited in an escrow account independent of the developer until a deed is delivered.
(ii) Liens which are subordinate to the leasehold interest and do not affect the lessee's right to use or enjoy the lot.
(iii) Property reservations which are for the purpose of bringing public services to the land being developed, such as easements for water and sewer lines.
(iv) Taxes or assessments which constitute liens before they are due and payable if imposed by a state or other public body having authority to assess and tax property or by a property owners' association.
(v) Beneficial property restrictions that are mutually enforceable by the lot owners in the subdivision. Restrictions, whether separately recorded or incorporated into individual deeds, must be applied uniformly to every lot or group of lots. To be considered beneficial and enforceable, any restriction or covenant that imposes an assessment on lot owners must apply to the developer on the same basis as other lot owners. Developers who maintain control of a subdivision through a Property Owners' Association, Architectural Control Committee, restrictive covenant or otherwise, shall transfer such control to the lot owners no later than when the developer ceases to own a majority of total lots in, or planned for, the subdivision. Relinquishment of developer control shall require affirmative action, usually in the form of an election based upon one vote per lot.
(vi) Reservations contained in United States land patents and similar Federal grants or reservations.
(5) Prior to the sale the developer discloses in a written statement to the purchaser all qualifying liens, reservations, taxes, assessments and restrictions applicable to the lot purchased. The developer must obtain a written receipt from the purchaser acknowledging that the statement required by this subparagraph was delivered to the purchaser.
(6) Prior to the sale the developer provides in a written statement good faith estimates of the cost to the purchaser of providing electric, water, sewer, gas and telephone service to the lot. The estimates for unsold lots must be updated every two years or more frequently if the developer has reason to believe that significant cost increases have occurred. The dates on which the estimates were made must be included in the statement. The developer must obtain a written receipt from the purchaser acknowledging that the statement required by this subparagraph was delivered to the purchaser.
(b) Intrastate Exemption Statement. To satisfy the requirements of paragraphs (a)(5) and (6) of this section, an Intrastate Exemption Statement containing the information prescribed in each such paragraph shall be given to each purchaser. A State-approved disclosure document may be used to satisfy this requirement if all the information required by paragraphs (a)(5) and (6) of this section is included in this disclosure. In such a case, the developer must obtain a written receipt from the purchaser and comply with all other requirements of the exemption. To be acceptable for purposes of the exemption, the statement(s) given to purchasers must contain neither advertising nor promotion on behalf of the developer or subdivision nor references to the Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection or the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. A sample Intrastate Exemption Statement is included in the exemption guidelines.
(c) The sale must also comply with the anti-fraud provisions of §1010.4(b) and (c) of this part.
§1010.13 Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) exemption.
(a) Eligibility requirements. The sale of a lot which meets the following requirements is exempt from registration requirements of the Act:
(1) The lot is in a subdivision which contains fewer than 300 lots and has contained fewer than 300 lots since April 28, 1969.
(2) The lot is located within a Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) as defined by the Office of Management and Budget and characterized in paragraph (b) of this section.
(3) The principal residence of the purchaser is within the same MSA as the subdivision.
(4) The purchaser or purchaser's spouse makes a personal on-the-lot inspection of the lot to be purchased prior to signing a contract or agreement.
(5) Each contract:
(i) Specifies the developer's and purchaser's responsibilities for providing and maintaining roads, water and sewer facilities and any existing or promised amenities;
(ii) Contains a good faith estimate of the year in which the roads, water and sewer facilities and promised amenities will be completed;
(iii) Contains a nonwaivable provision giving the purchaser the opportunity to revoke the contract until at least midnight of the seventh calendar day following the date the purchaser signed the contract, or, if the purchaser is entitled to a longer revocation period by operation of state law, that period becomes the Federal revocation period and the contract must reflect the requirements of the longer period.
(6) The lot being sold must be free and clear of liens such as mortgages, deeds of trust, tax liens, mechanics' liens, or judgments. For purposes of this exemption, the term liens does not include the following:
(i) Mortgages or deeds of trust which contain release provisions for the individual lot purchased if:
(A) The contract of sale obligates the developer to deliver, within 180 days, a warranty deed (or its equivalent under local law), which at the time of delivery is free from any monetary liens or encumbrances; and
(B) The purchaser's payments are deposited in an escrow account independent of the developer until a deed is delivered.
(ii) Liens which are subordinate to the leasehold interest and do not affect the lessee's right to use or enjoy the lot.
(iii) Property reservations which are for the purpose of bringing public services to the land being developed, such as easements for water and sewer lines.
(iv) Taxes or assessments which constitute liens before they are due and payable if imposed by a state or other public body having authority to assess and tax property or by a property owners' association.
(v) Beneficial property restrictions that are mutually enforceable by the lot owners in the subdivision. Restrictions, whether separately recorded or incorporated into individual deeds, must be applied uniformly to every lot or group of lots. To be considered beneficial and enforceable, any restriction or covenant that imposes an assessment on lot owners must apply to the developer on the same basis as other lot owners. Developers who maintain control of a subdivision through a Property Owners' Association, Architectural Control Committee, restrictive covenants, or otherwise, shall transfer such control to the lot owners no later than when the developer ceases to own a majority of total lots in, or planned for, the subdivision. Relinquishment of developer control shall require affirmative action, usually in the form of an election based upon one vote per lot.
(vi) Reservations contained in United States land patents and similar Federal grants or reservations.
(7) Before the sale the developer gives a written MSA Exemption Statement to the purchaser and obtains a written receipt acknowledging that the statement was received. A sample MSA Exemption Statement is included in the exemption guidelines. A State-approved disclosure document may be used to satisfy this requirement if all of the information required by this section is included. The statement(s) given to purchasers must contain neither advertising nor promotion on behalf of the developer or the subdivision nor references to the Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection or the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. In descriptive and concise terms, the statement that the developer must give the purchaser shall disclose the following:
(i) All liens, reservations, taxes, assessments, beneficial property restrictions which are enforceable by other lot owners in the subdivision, and adverse claims which are applicable to the lot to be purchased.
(ii) Good faith estimates of the cost to the purchaser of providing electric, water, sewer, gas and telephone service to the lot. The estimates for unsold lots must be updated every two years, or more frequently if the developer has reason to believe that significant cost increases have occurred. The dates on which the estimates were made must be included in the statement.
(8) The developer executes and gives to the purchaser a written instrument designating a person within the state of residence of the purchaser as the developer's agent for service of process. The developer must also acknowledge in writing that it submits to the legal jurisdiction of the state in which the purchaser or lessee resides.
(9) The developer executes a written affirmation for each sale made under this exemption. By January 31 of each year, the developer submits to the Director a copy of the executed affirmation for each sale made during the preceding calendar year or a master affirmation in which are listed all purchasers' names and addresses and the identity of the lots purchased. Individual affirmations must be available for the Director's review at all times during the year. The affirmation must be in the form provided in section I of the appendix to this part: Form for Developer's Affirmation for Land Sale.
(b) Metropolitan Statistical Area. Metropolitan Statistical Areas are defined by the Office of Management and Budget generally on the basis of population statistics reported in a census. To determine whether a subdivision is located within an MSA and the boundaries of an MSA, contact the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs, Office of Management and Budget, 726 Jackson Place NW., Washington, DC 20503.
(c) The sale must also comply with the anti-fraud provisions of §1010.4(b) and (c).
§1010.14 Regulatory exemptions.
(a) Eligibility requirements. The following transactions are exempt from the registration requirements of the Act unless the Director has terminated the exemption in accordance with paragraph (b) of this section.
(1) The sale of lots, each of which will be sold for less than $100, including closing costs, if the purchaser will not be required to purchase more than one lot.
(2) The lease of lots for a term not to exceed five years if the terms of the lease do not obligate the lessee to renew.
(3) The sale of lots to a person who is engaged in a bona fide land sales business.
(4) The sale of a lot to a person who owns the contiguous lot which has a residential, commercial or industrial building on it.
(5) The sale of real estate to a government or government agency.
(6) The sale of a lot to a person who has leased and resided primarily on the lot for at least the year preceding the sale.
(b) Termination. If the Director has reasonable grounds to believe that exemption from the registration requirements in a particular case is not in the public interest, the Director may, after issuing a notice and giving the respondent an opportunity to request a hearing within fifteen days of receipt of the notice, terminate eligibility for exemption. The basis for issuing a notice may be the conduct of the developer or agent, such as unlawful conduct or insolvency, or adverse information about the lots or real estate that should be disclosed to the purchasers. Proceedings will be governed by §1012.238.
(c) The sale must also comply with the anti-fraud provisions of §1010.4(b) and (c) of this part.
§1010.15 Regulatory exemption-multiple site subdivision-determination required.
(a) General.
(1) The sale of lots contained in multiple sites of fewer than 100 lots each, offered pursuant to a single common promotional plan, is exempt from the registration requirements.
(2) For purposes of this exemption, the sale of lots in an individual site that exceeds 99 lots is not exempt from registration. Likewise, the sale of lots in a site containing fewer than 100 lots, where the developer either owns contiguous land or holds an option or other evidence of intent to acquire contiguous land which, when taken cumulatively, would or could result in one site of 100 or more lots, is not exempt from registration. Furthermore, the sale of lots that are within a subdivision established by a separate developer is not exempt from registration by this provision.
(b) Eligibility requirements. The sale of each lot must meet the following requirements to be eligible for this exemption.
(1) The lot is sold “as is” with all advertised improvements and amenities completed and in the condition advertised.
(2) The lot is in conformance with all local codes and standards.
(3) The lot is accessible, both legally and physically. For lots which are advertised or otherwise represented as “residential,” either primary or secondary, with any inference that a permanent or temporary dwelling unit of any description (excluding collapsible tents) can be built or installed, physical access must be available by automobile, pick-up truck or equivalent “on-road” vehicle.
(4) At the time of closing, a title insurance binder or title opinion reflecting the condition of title must be issued to the purchaser showing that, subject only to exceptions approved in writing by the purchaser at the time of closing, marketable title is vested in the seller.
(5) Each contract or agreement and any promissory notes:
(i) Contain the non-waivable provision found in section II of the appendix to this part: Language Notifying Buyer of Option to Cancel Contract in bold face type (which must be distinguished from the type used for the rest of the document) on the face or signature page above all signatures. If the purchaser is entitled to a longer revocation period by operation of state or local law, that period becomes the Federal revocation period and the contract must reflect the requirement of the longer period rather than the seven days. The revocation provisions may not be limited or qualified in the contract or other document by requiring a specific type of notice or by requiring that notice be given at a specified place.
(ii) Obligate the developer to deliver, within 180 days, a warranty deed (or its equivalent under local law) for the lot which at the time of delivery is free from any monetary liens or encumbrances.
(6) The purchaser or purchaser's spouse makes a personal on-the-lot inspection of the lot to be purchased before signing a contract.
(7) The purchaser's payments are deposited in an escrow account independent of the developer until a deed is delivered.
(8) Prior to the purchaser signing a contract or agreement of sale, the developer discloses in a written Lot Information Statement all liens, reservations, taxes, assessments, easements and restrictions applicable to the lot purchased (see paragraph (b)(11) of this section).
(9) Prior to the purchaser signing a contract or agreement of sale, the developer discloses in a written Lot Information Statement the name, address and telephone number of the local governmental agency or agencies from which information on permits or other requirements for water, sewer and electrical installations can be obtained. This Statement will also contain the name, address and telephone number of the suppliers which would or could provide the foregoing services.
(10) The lot sale must comply with the anti-fraud provisions of 12 CFR 1010.4(b) and (c) and the sales practices and standards in §§1011.10 through 1011.28.
(11) A written Lot Information Statement must be delivered to, and acknowledged by, each purchaser prior to his or her signing a contract or agreement of sale, and must contain the information shown in the format below. The Statement must be typed or printed in at least 10 point font. A copy of the acknowledgement will be maintained by the developer for three years and will be made available to ILSRP upon request. If the Statement is not delivered as required, the contract or agreement of sale may be revoked and a full refund paid, at the option of the purchaser, within two years of the signing date and the contract or agreement of sale will clearly provide this right. A sample format for the Statement is provided in section III of the appendix to this part: Sample Lot Information Statement and Sample Receipt.
(c) Request for Multiple Site Subdivision Exemption.
(1) The developer must file a request for the Multiple Site Subdivision Exemption. The request must be accompanied by a filing fee of $500 (prepared in accordance with §1010.35(a)) and a sample Lot Information Statement, substantially in the form set forth in section IV of the appendix to this part: Request for Multiple Site Subdivision Exemption.
(2) This exemption will become effective upon issuance of an Exemption Order by the Director.
(d) Annual Report.
(1) By January 31 of each year the developer will send a report to the Director listing each site and its location available for a sale pursuant to the exemption during the preceding year and indicate the number of lot sales made in each site. The report will describe any changes in the information provided in the Request for the Multiple Site Subdivision Exemption or contain a statement that there are no changes.
(2) The Annual Report must be accompanied by a filing fee of $100.
(3) The Annual Report must be signed and dated by the developer, attesting to its completeness and accuracy.
(4) Failure to submit the Annual Report within ten days after the receipt of notice from the Director will automatically terminate eligibility for the exemption as of the Report due date.
(e) Termination. If, subsequent to the issuance of an Exemption Order, the Director has reasonable grounds to believe that exemption from the registration requirements in the particular case is not in the public interest, the Director may, after issuing a notice and giving the respondent an opportunity to request a hearing within fifteen days of receipt of the notice, terminate the exemption order. The basis for issuing a notice may be apparent omissions or misrepresentations in the documents submitted to the Director, the conduct of the developer or agent, such as unlawful conduct or insolvency, or adverse information about the real estate that should be disclosed to purchasers. Proceedings will be governed by §1012.238.
§1010.16 Regulatory exemption-determination required.
(a) General. The Director may exempt from the registration requirements of the Act any subdivision or lots in a subdivision by issuing an order in writing if it is determined that registration is not necessary in the public interest and for the protection of purchasers on the basis of the small amount or limited character of the offering and the requirements contained in paragraph (b) of this section.
(b) Eligibility requirements. An exemption order may be issued at the discretion of the Director on the basis of the small amount or limited character of the offering if the following requirements are met:
(1) The subdivision or sales substantially meet the requirements of one of the exemptions available under this chapter.
(2) Each contract:
(i) Specifies the developer's and purchaser's responsibilities for providing and maintaining roads, water and sewer facilities and any existing or promised amenities;
(ii) Contains a good faith estimate of the year in which the roads, water and sewer facilities and promised amenities will be completed;
(iii) Contains a non-waivable provision giving the purchaser the opportunity to revoke the contract until at least midnight of the seventh calendar day following the date the purchaser signed the contract. If the purchaser is entitled to a longer revocation period by operation of state law, that period becomes the Federal revocation period and the contract must reflect the requirements of the longer period.
(iv) Contains a provision that obligates the developer to deliver to the purchaser within 180 days of the date the purchaser signed the sales contract, a warranty deed, or its equivalent under local law, which at the time of delivery is free from any monetary liens or encumbrances.
(3) The purchaser or purchaser's spouse makes a personal on-the-lot inspection of the lot to be purchased before signing a contract.
(4) The developer files a request for an exemption order and supporting documentation in accordance with paragraphs (c) and (d) of this section and submits a filing fee of $500.00 in accordance with §1010.35(a) of this part. This fee is not refundable.
(c) Request. The request for an Exemption Order must be substantially in the format set forth in section V of the appendix to this part: Request for Regulatory Exemption Order.
(d) Supporting documentation. A request for an exemption order must be accompanied by the following documentation:
(1) A plat of the entire subdivision with the lots subject to the exemption request delineated thereon.
(2) A copy of the contract to be used.
(3) A clear and specific statement detailing how the proposed sales of lots subject to the exemption request substantially complies with one of the available exemption provisions.
(4) A description of the method by which the lots have been and will be promoted and to which population centers the promotion has been and will be directed.
(e) The sale must also comply with the anti-fraud provisions of §1010.4(b) and (c) of this part.
(f) Termination. If, subsequent to the issuance of an exemption order, the Director has reasonable grounds to believe that exemption from the registration requirements in the particular case is not in the public interest, the Director may, after issuing a notice and giving the respondent an opportunity to request a hearing within fifteen days of receipt of the notice, terminate the exemption order. The basis for issuing a notice may be apparent omissions or misrepresentations in the documents submitted to the Director, the conduct of the developer or agent, such as unlawful conduct or insolvency, or adverse information about the real estate that should be disclosed to purchasers. Proceedings will be governed by §1012.238.
§1010.17 Advisory opinion.
(a) General. A developer may request an opinion from the Director as to whether an offering qualifies for an exemption or is subject to the jurisdiction of the Act.
(b) Requirements. All requests for Advisory Opinions must be accompanied by the following:
(1) A $500.00 filing fee submitted in accordance with §1010.35(a). This fee is not refundable.
(2) A comprehensive description of the conditions and operations of the offering. There is no prescribed format for submitting this information, but the developer should at least cite the applicable statutory or regulatory basis for the exemption or lack of jurisdiction and thoroughly explain how the offering either satisfies the requirements for exemption or falls outside the purview of the Act.
(3) An affirmation as set forth in section VI of the appendix to this part: Developer's Affirmation for Advisory Opinion.
§1010.18 No Action Letter.
(a) If the sale of lots is subject to the registration requirements of the Act but the circumstances of the sale are such that no affirmative action to enforce the registration requirements is needed to protect the public interest or prospective purchasers, the Director may issue a No Action Letter.
(b) To obtain a No Action Letter a developer must submit a request which includes a thorough description of the proposed transaction, the property involved, and the circumstances surrounding the sale.
(c) The issuance of a No Action Letter will not affect any right which a purchaser has under the Act, and it will not limit future action by the Director if there is evidence to show that affirmative action is necessary to protect the public interest or prospective purchasers. In no event will a No Action Letter be issued after the sale has occurred.
§1010.19 [Reserved]
§1010.20 Requirements for registering a subdivision-Statement of Record-filing and form.
(a) Filing.
(1) In order to register a subdivision and receive an effective date, the developer or owner of the subdivision must file a Statement of Record with the Director by either:
(i) U.S. Mail, to the following official address: Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, Interstate Land Sales Registration Program, 1700 G Street NW., Washington, DC 20552; or
(ii) Electronic means designated on the ILSA program page on the Bureau's Web site at www.consumerfinance.gov/.
(2) When the Statement of Record is filed, a fee in the amount set out in §1010.35(b) must be paid in accordance with §1010.35(a).
(b) Form.
(1) The Statement of Record shall be in the format specified in §1010.100 and shall be completed in accordance with the instructions in §§1010.102, 1010.105 through 1010.118, 1010.200, 1010.208 through 1010.216, and 1010.219. It shall be supported by the documents required by §§1010.208 through 1010.216 and 1010.219. It shall include any other information or documents which the Director may require as being necessary or appropriate for the protection of purchasers.
(2) The requirements relating to paper type, tabs, folding, and ordering for filings with the Bureau in §1010.102(a), (g), and (h) do not apply if a Statement of Record is filed with the Bureau via electronic means designated on the Bureau's Web site pursuant to §1010.20(a).
(c) State filings. A Statement of Record submitted under the provisions of 12 CFR part 1010, subpart C-Certification of Substantially Equivalent State Law, shall consist of the materials designated by the Certification Agreement between the Director and the certified state in which the subdivision is located.
§1010.21 Effective dates.
(a) General. The effective date of an initial, consolidated or amended Statement of Record is the 30th day after the filing of the latest amendatory material unless the Director notifies the developer in writing prior to such 30th day that:
(1) The effective date has been suspended in accordance with §1010.45(a), or
(2) An earlier effective date has been determined.
(b) Suspension of effective date by developer.
(1) A developer, or owner, may request that the effective date of its Statement of Record be suspended, provided there are no administrative proceedings pending against either of them at the time the request is submitted. The request must include any consolidations or amendments which have been made to the initial Statement of Record and may be submitted via the electronic means of submission described in §1010.20(a). Forms for this purpose will be furnished by the Director upon request.
(2) Upon acceptance by the Director, the effectiveness of the Statement of Record shall be suspended as of the date the request was executed by the developer or owner.
(3) The suspension shall continue until the developer, or owner, submits all amendments necessary to bring the registration into full compliance with the Regulations which are in effect on the date of the amendments and the Director allows those amendments to become effective.
§1010.22 Statement of record-initial or consolidated.
(a) Initial Statement of Record.
(1) Except in the case of exempt transactions, an initial Statement of Record shall be filed, and an effective date issued, prior to selling or leasing any lot in a subdivision.
(2) If a developer buys from another developer 100 or more lots from an existing registration, the new developer, or owner, may have to submit a new initial Statement of Record and receive an effective date covering the acquired lots prior to selling or leasing any of those lots.
(3) Changes in principals due to a sale of stock in a corporation or changes in partners or joint venturers which are accomplished in accordance with the partnership or joint venture agreement but which do not cause a change in the title to the land in the subdivision may be submitted as an amendment.
(4) Any initial Statement of Record must be accompanied by a fee, as specified in §1010.35(b), based upon the number of lots sought to be registered.
(b) Consolidated Statement of Record.
(1) If the developer intends to sell or lease additional lots as part of the same common promotional plan with lots already registered, a consolidated Statement of Record may be submitted for the additional lots. A fee, as specified in §1010.35(b) and based on the number of additional lots, must accompany the submission. The additional lots may not be sold or leased until a new effective date is issued.
(2) If the additional lots are simply the result of a replatting of lots previously registered and enumerated in the Property Report and do not include any additional land, the change may be made by an amendment. However, the amendment must be accompanied by a fee, as specified in §1010.35(b), based on the number of additional lots.
(c) Consolidated Statement of Record-Form. A consolidated Statement of Record shall contain the elements listed in paragraphs (c)(1) through (4) of this section. Pages having no changes and documents in previous submissions which apply equally to the additional lots may be included by reference. However, the developer may, at its option, submit the entire format for an initial filing, including copies of previously submitted documents, to expedite the examination process.
(1) Those pages of the Property Report portion and Additional Information and Documentation portion which contain changes which have occurred since the last effective submission, and
(2) A recapitulation or listing of each of the section headings, and subheadings if necessary, of the Additional Information and Documentation portion. Each item of the listing shall contain a statement as to whether or not any change is made in the section; whether any new or additional information is being submitted and, if documentation is added by cross reference, the previous submission in which that documentation may be found, and
(3) Documentation to support the additional lots (e.g., plat maps, topographic maps and general plan to reflect new lots, title information, permits for additional facilities, financial assurances of completion of additional facilities, financial statements) or updated or expanded documents in support of previous submissions, and
(4) The affirmation required by §1010.219.
(d) Consolidated Statement of Record amends prior Statement of Record. A Consolidated Statement of Record shall contain all applicable information for all registered lots in the subdivision except those deleted pursuant to other provisions in these regulations. The resulting Property Report shall be used for all sales in the subdivision, except for those transactions which are exempt from the provisions of the Act or which have been granted an exempt status by the Director, unless the Director has specifically authorized the use of multiple Property Reports.
(e) Initial Statement of Record-when prior approval to submit is required. In those subdivisions where there is a disparity between the lots already registered and those sought to be registered because of location, terrain, proposed use of the lots or the amenities to be furnished or available, the developer may present a resume of the differences and request the Director's permission to file a separate initial Statement of Record for the additional lots. Upon consideration of the facts submitted, the Director may allow such a procedure.
(f) Lots which have been deleted from registration. Should the developer, for any reason, delete by amendment any registered lots from an effective Statement of Record, those lots must be reregistered by a consolidation and a new effective date issued, before they can be sold or leased. An appropriate fee must accompany the submission.
(g) Lots sold to individual purchasers. It is not necessary to delete from the registration those lots which have been sold to individual purchasers for their own use.
§1010.23 Amendment-filing and form.
(a) Filing. If any change occurs in any representation of material fact required to be stated in an effective Statement of Record, an amendment shall be filed. The amendment shall be filed within 15 days of the date on which the developer knows, or should have known, that there has been a change in material fact. The amendment may be filed via the electronic means of submission described in §1010.20(a).
(b) Form. An amendment shall include by reference the prior Statement of Record except for any changes in material fact. A change in material fact shall be specifically described and supported by the same documentation which would be required for an initial submission. Any amendment shall be accompanied by:
(1) A letter from the developer giving a clear and concise description of the purpose and significance of the amendment and referring to the section and page of the Statement of Record which is being amended, and
(2) All pages of the Statement of Record, which have been amended, retyped in the required format to reflect the changes. The ILSRP number of the Statement of Record shall appear at the top of each page of the material submitted.
(c) Amendments to suspended filings. Developers wishing to reactivate a suspended filing shall file the following:
(1) Any amendments necessary to bring the filing into compliance, submitted in accordance with paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section;
(2) An activity report in the form prescribed by §1010.310; and
(3) An amendment fee, if required under §1010.35(d)(2).
§§1010.24-1010.28 [Reserved]
§1010.29 Use of property report-misstatements, omissions, or representation of Bureau approval prohibited.
Nothing in these regulations shall be construed to authorize or approve the use of a property report containing any untrue statement of a material fact or omitting to state a material fact required to be stated therein. Nor shall anything in these regulations be construed to authorize or permit any representation that the Property Report is prepared or approved by the Director, ILSRP or the Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection.
§1010.35 Payment of fees.
(a) Method of payment.
(1) Each fee must be paid by:
(i) Certified check, cashier's check, or postal money order made payable to the Treasurer of the United States, with the registration number, when known, and the name, of the subdivision on the face of the check, and mailed to an address specified by the Director; or
(ii) Electronic payment in a manner specified by the Director.
(2) Information regarding the current mailing address or electronic payment procedures is available from: Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, Interstate Land Sales Registration Program, 1700 G Street NW., Washington, DC 20552, or on the Bureau's Web site at www.consumerfinance.gov.
(b) Fees for registration. The fee for each initial and consolidated registration is set forth in section VII of the appendix to this part: Initial and Consolidated Registration Fee Schedule.
(c) Fee for Exemption Order or Advisory Opinion. The filing fee for an Exemption Order or an Advisory Opinion (§1010.16 or §1010.17) is $500. This fee is not refundable.
(d) Amendment fee.
(1) A fee of $800 is charged when an Annual Activity Report reflects an annual ending inventory of 101 or more unsold registered lots.
(2) A fee of $800 is charged for an amendment to reactivate a Statement of Record subsequent to its suspension, unless the developer has 100 or fewer unsold lots included in the Statement of Record.
§1010.45 Suspensions.
(a) Suspension notice-prior to effective date.
(1) If it appears to the Director that a Statement of Record or an amendment is on its face incomplete or inaccurate in any material respect, the Director shall so advise the developer, by issuing a suspension notice, within a reasonable time after the filing of such materials but prior to the time the materials would otherwise be effective.
(2) A suspension notice issued pursuant to this subsection shall suspend the effective date of the Statement of Record or the amendment. It shall continue in effect until 30 days, or such earlier date as the Director may determine, after the necessary amendments are submitted which correct all deficiencies cited in the notice.
(3) Upon receipt of a suspension notice, the developer has 15 days in which to request a hearing. If a hearing is requested, it shall be held within 20 days of the receipt of the request by the Director.
(b) Suspension orders-subsequent to effective date.
(1) A notice of proceedings to suspend an effective Statement of Record may be issued to a developer if the Director has reasonable grounds to believe that an effective Statement of Record includes an untrue statement of a material fact, or omits a material fact required by the Act or rules and regulations, or omits a material fact which is necessary to make the statements therein not misleading. The Director may, after notice, and after opportunity for a hearing requested pursuant to §1012.220 within 15 days of receipt of such notice, issue an order suspending the Statement of Record. In the event that a suspension order is issued, such order shall remain in effect until the developer has amended the Statement of Record or otherwise complied with the requirements of the order. When the developer has complied with the requirements of the order, the Director shall so declare and thereupon the suspension order shall cease to be effective.
(2) If the Director undertakes an examination of a developer or its records to determine whether a suspension order should be issued, and the developer fails to cooperate with the Director or obstructs, or refuses to permit the Director to make such examination, the Director may issue an order suspending the Statement of Record. Such order shall remain in effect until the developer has complied with the requirements of the order. When the developer has complied with the requirements of the order, the Director shall so declare and thereupon the suspension order shall cease to be effective. In accordance with the procedure described in §1012.235, a hearing may be requested.
(3) Upon receipt of an amendment to an effective Statement of Record, the Director may issue an order suspending the Statement of Record until the amendment becomes effective if the Director has reasonable grounds to believe that such action is necessary or appropriate in the public interest or for the protection of purchasers. In accordance with the procedure described in §1012.235, a hearing may be requested.
(4) Suspension orders issued pursuant to this subsection shall operate to suspend the Statement of Record as of the date the order is either served on the developer or its registered agent or is delivered by certified or registered mail to the address of the developer or its authorized agent.
§1010.100 Statement of Record-format.
(a) The Statement of Record consists of two portions; the Property Report portion and the Additional Information and Documentation portion.
(b) General format. The Statement of Record shall be prepared in accordance with the format set forth in section VIII of the appendix to this part: Property Report:
§1010.101 [Reserved]
§1010.102 General instructions for completing the Statement of Record.
(a) Paper and type. The Statement of Record shall be on good quality, unglazed white or pastel paper. Letter size paper, approximately 81/2 × 11 inches in size, will be used for the Property Report portion, and either letter size paper, approximately 81/2 × 11 inches in size, or legal size paper, approximately 81/2 × 14 inches in size, will be used for the Additional Information and Documentation portion. Side margins shall be no less than 1 inch and no greater than 11/2 inches. Top and bottom margins shall be no less than 1 inch. In the preparation of the charts to be included in the Property Report, the developer may vary from the above margin requirements or print the charts lengthwise on the required size paper if such measures are necessary to make the charts readable. The Statement of Record shall be prepared in an easily readable, uniform font.
(b) Numbering and dating. Each page of the Statement of Record as submitted to ILSRP shall be numbered and shall include the date of typing or preparation in the lower right hand corner, except in the final printed version of the Property Report portion.
(c) Signing. The Statement of Record shall be signed by the senior executive officer of the developer or a designated agent.
(d) Printing. The Statement of Record and, insofar as practical, all papers and documents filed as a part thereof, shall be printed, lithographed, photocopied, typewritten or prepared by any similar process which, in the opinion of the Director, produces copies suitable for a permanent record. Irrespective of the process used, all copies of any such materials shall be clear and easily readable.
(e) Headings, subheadings, captions, introductory paragraphs, warnings. Property Report subject “headings” are those descriptive introductory words which appear immediately after section numbers 1010.106 through 1010.116 (e.g. §1010.108 has “General Information” and §1010.111 has “Utilities”). Each such heading shall be printed in the Property Report in underlined capital letters and centered at the top of a new page. Section numbers shall not be printed in the Property Report. Property Report subheadings are those descriptive introductory words which appear in italics in the regulations at the beginning of paragraphs designated by paragraph letters (a), (b), (c) etc. An example of a subheading is “water” found immediately after the paragraph letter (a) in §1010.111. These subheadings will be printed in the Property Report only if they are relevant to the subject subdivision. If printed these subheadings shall be capitalized and shall begin at the left hand margin of the page. Property Report “captions” are those descriptive introductory words which appear in italics in the Regulations at the beginning of paragraphs designated by numbers (1), (2), (3), etc. An example of such captions is “Sales Contract and Delivery of Deed” found immediately after the paragraph number “(1)” in §1010.109(b). These captions are to be printed in the Property Report only if they are applicable to the subject subdivision. If printed, these captions shall be centered on the page from the side margins, and shall have only the first letter of each word capitalized. Headings and subheadings will be used in the Property Report in accordance with the sample page appearing in section IX of the appendix to this part. Introductory paragraphs will follow headings if they are applicable and necessary for a readable entry into the subject matters, but note, the introductory paragraphs for “Title to the Property and Land Use” are to be used in every case as provided in §1010.109(a)(1). Subheadings and captions which do not apply to the subdivision should be omitted from the Property Report portion and answered “not applicable” in the Additional Information and Documentation portion, unless specifically required to be included elsewhere in these instructions. Warnings shall be printed substantially as they appear in the instructions in §§1010.105 through 1010.118. They shall be printed in capital letters and may be enclosed in a box. The paragraphs in the Property Report portion need not be numbered. A sample page is set forth in section IX of the appendix to this part: Sample Page for Statement of Record.
(f) Language style. All information given in the Property Report portion shall be stated in narrative form using plain, concise, everyday language which can be readily understood by purchasers who are unfamiliar with real estate transactions. Excessively long paragraphs should be avoided. Keep them as brief as possible. Use separate paragraphs for different points discussed. Disclose all pertinent facts. Potential consequences to a purchaser must be made clear even though not specifically asked for in the format and the instructions. In the Property Report the pronouns “you” and “your” shall generally be used in referring to the prospective purchaser and the pronouns “we,” “us,” and “our” shall generally be used in referring to the developer. The Director specifically reserves the right to require modification of the text when the narrative does not meet the standards of this section.
(g) Format of the Additional Information and Documentation portion of the Statement of Record. The supporting information and documentation required by these regulations shall be identified by affixing a tab on the right side of the cover sheet of the required information or documentation and by identifying on the tab the section number of the Statement of Record instructions to which the information or documentation corresponds. This information or documentation shall then be placed immediately after the page(s) on which the section number and answers for that section appear. If the data in a document is applicable to more than one section of instructions, the developer may substitute as a document in the second case a statement incorporating the earlier document. Deeds, title policies, subdivision plats or maps and other documentary information required to be contained in the Additional Information and Documentation portion of the Statement of Record need not be on the same size paper as the Statement of Record but, if larger, shall be folded to a size no larger than 81/2 × 14 inches. Supporting documents shall be inserted into the binding in such a manner as to permit them to be examined without the necessity of removing them from the binding. This may be accomplished by proper folding or through the use of envelopes.
(h) Ordering. The Statement of Record shall be filed with the Property Report portion on top, including any documents which may be required to be attached when delivered to the purchaser, followed by the Additional Information and Documentation portion.
(i) Advertising and promotional material. No advertising, or promotional material or statements which are self-serving on behalf of the developer or owner may be included in the Statement of Record or resulting Property Report.
(j) Additional information.
(1) In addition to the information expressly required to be stated in the Statement of Record, there shall be added, and the Director may require, such further material information, documentation and certification as may be necessary in the public interest and for the protection of purchasers or necessary in order to make the statements not misleading in the light of circumstances under which they are made.
(2) The instructions are not all inclusive. The developer shall include any other facts which would have a bearing upon the use by the purchaser of any of the facilities, services or amenities; which would cause or result in additional expenses to the purchaser; which would have an effect upon the use and enjoyment of the lot by the purchaser for the purpose for which it is sold or which would adversely affect the value of the lot.
(k) Modification of format or content. The Director may require or permit modification to the content and format of the Property Report to include additional information, to modify or omit required information, or to change the sequence or position of information when such changes are deemed to be in the public interest or for the protection of purchasers.
(l) Required documentation. Where the documentation required by the Statement of Record cannot be obtained, the Director may permit the best available alternative documentation to be substituted.
(m) Final version of Property Report. On the date that a Statement of Record becomes effective, the Property Report portion shall become the Property Report for the subject subdivision. The version of the Property Report delivered to prospective lot purchasers shall be verbatim to that found effective by the Director and shall have no covers, pictures, emblems, logograms or identifying insignia other than as required by these regulations. It shall meet the same standards as to grade of paper, type size, margins, style and color of print as those set herein for the Statement of Record, except where required otherwise by these regulations. However, the date of typing or preparation of the pages and the ILSRP number shall not appear in the final version. If the final version of the Property Report is commercially printed, or photocopied by a process which results in a commercial printing quality, and is bound on the left side, both sides of the pages may be used for printed material. If it is typed or photocopied by a process which does not result in a clear and legible product on both sides of the page or is bound at the top, printing shall be done on only one side of the page. If a Statement of Record is filed with the Bureau via electronic means pursuant to §1010.20(a), the version of the Property Report delivered to prospective lot purchasers shall meet the same standards that apply under these regulations to a Statement of Record not filed with the Bureau via electronic means. One copy of the final version of the Property Report, in the exact form in which it is delivered to prospective lot purchasers, shall be sent to ILSRP Office within 20 days of the date on which the Statement of Record, amendment, or consolidation is allowed to become effective by the Director. If a Property Report in a foreign language is used as required by §1011.25(g), a copy of that Property Report together with a copy of the translated documents shall be furnished the Director within 20 days of the date on which the advertising is first used. A Property Report prepared pursuant to these regulations shall not be distributed to potential lot purchasers until after the Statement of Record of which it is a part or any amendment to that Statement of Record has been made effective by the Director.
§1010.103 Developer obligated improvements.
(a) If the developer represents either orally or in writing that it will provide or complete roads or facilities for water, sewer, gas, electricity or recreational amenities, it must be contractually obligated to do so, and the obligation shall be clearly stated in the Property Report. While the developer may disclose relevant facts about completion, the obligation to complete cannot be conditioned, other than as permitted by 15 U.S.C. 1703(a)(2), and an estimated completion date (month and year) must be stated in the Property Report. However, a developer that has only tentative plans to complete may so state in the Property Report, provided that the statement clearly identifies conditions to which the completion of the facilities are subject and states that there are no guarantees the facilities will be completed.
(b) If a party other than the developer is responsible for providing or completing roads or facilities for water, sewer, gas, electricity or recreational amenities, that entity shall be clearly identified in the Property Report under the categories described in §1010.110, §1010.111 or §1010.114, as applicable. A statement shall be included in the proper section of the Property Report that the developer is not responsible for providing or completing the facility or amenity and can give no assurance that it will be completed or available for use.
§1010.104 [Reserved]
§1010.105 Cover page.
The cover page of the Property Report shall be prepared in accordance with the following directions:
(a) The margins shall be at least 1 inch.
(b) The next 3 inches shall contain a warning, centered, in 1/2 inch capital letters in red type with 1/4 inch space between the lines which reads as follows: “READ THIS PROPERTY REPORT BEFORE SIGNING ANYTHING”.
(c) The remainder of the page shall contain the language set forth in section X of the appendix to this part: Language for Warning on Cover Page of Property Report beginning 1/4-inch below the last line of the warning.
(d)
(1) If the purchaser is entitled to a longer revocation period by operation of state law, that period becomes the Federal revocation period and the Cover Page must reflect the requirements of the longer period, rather than the seven days.
(2)
(i) If a deed is not delivered within 180 days of the signing of the contract or agreement of sale or unless certain provisions are included in the contract or agreement, the purchaser is entitled to cancel the contract within two years from the date of signing the contract or agreement.
(ii) The deed must be a warranty deed, or where such a deed is not commonly used, a similar deed legally acceptable in the jurisdiction where the lot is located. The deed must be free and clear of liens and encumbrances.
(iii) The contract provisions are:
(A) A legally sufficient and recordable lot description; and
(B) A provision that the seller will give the purchaser written notification of purchaser's default or breach of contract and the opportunity to have at least 20 days from the receipt of notice to correct the default or breach; and
(C) A provision that, if the purchaser loses rights and interest in the lot because of the purchaser's default or breach of contract after 15% of the purchase price, exclusive of interest, has been paid, the seller shall refund to the purchaser any amount which remains from the payments made after subtracting 15% of the purchase price, exclusive of interest, or the amount of the seller's actual damages, whichever is the greater.
(iv) If a deed is not delivered within 180 days of the signing of the contract or if the necessary provisions are not included in the contract, the following statement shall be used in place of any other rescission language: “Under Federal law you may cancel your contract or agreement of sale any time within two years from the date of signing.”
(e) At the time of submission, the developer may indicate its intention to comply with the red printing by an illustration or by a statement to that effect.
(f) The “Date of This Report” shall be the date on which the Director allows the Statement of Record to become effective and shall not be entered until the submission has become effective.
§1010.106 Table of contents.
(a) The second page(s) shall consist of a Table of Contents which lists the headings in the Property Report, the major subheadings, if any, and the page on which they appear. An example is set forth in section XI of the appendix to this part: Sample Entry in Table of Contents for Statement of Record.
(b) Use of “You” and “We.” At the end of the Table of Contents insert the following remark: “In this Property Report, the words “you” and “your” refer to the buyer. The words “we,” “us” and “our” refer to the developer.”
§1010.107 Risks of buying land.
(a) The next page shall be headed “Risks of Buying Land” and shall contain the paragraphs listed in section XII of the appendix to this part: Required Paragraphs for Risks of Buying Land.
(b) Warnings. If the instructions of the Director require any warnings to be included in the Property Report portion, the following statement shall be added beneath the “Risks of Buying Land” under a heading “Warnings”: “Throughout this Property Report there are specific warnings concerning the developer, the subdivision or individual lots. Be sure to read all warnings carefully before signing any contract or agreement.” Both the heading, “Warnings,” and the statement shall be printed in capital letters and enclosed in a box.
§1010.108 General information.
Insert and complete the format set forth in section XIII of the appendix to this part: Format for General Information.
§1010.109 Title to the property and land use.
(a) General instructions.
(1) Below the heading “Title to the Property and Land Use” insert the introductory paragraphs set forth in section XIV of the appendix to this part: Paragraphs to be included in the General Report-Title to the Property and Land Use.
(2) Information to be provided. After the above introductory paragraphs provide the information required by the following instructions and questions. Follow a general form identical to the sample page set forth in section IX of the appendix to this part: Sample Page for Statement of Record.
(b) Method of sale:
(1) Sales contract and delivery of deed.
(i) Will the buyer sign a purchase money or installment contract or similar instrument in connection with the purchase of the lot? When will a deed be delivered?
(ii) If an installment contract is used, include the following, or substantially the same, language in the disclosure narrative under “Method of Sale”: “If you fail to make your payments required by the contract, you may lose your lot and all monies paid.”
(iii) If, at the time of a credit sale, the developer gives the buyer a deed to the lot, what type of security must the buyer give the seller?
(iv) If the lots are to be sold on the basis of an installment contract, can the developer or the owner of the subdivision or their creditors encumber the lots under contract? If so, include the following warning in the disclosure narrative under the caption “Sales contract and delivery of deed”: “The (indicate subdivision developer, owner, or their creditors) can place a mortgage on or encumber the lots in this subdivision after they are under contract. This may cause you to lose your lot and any monies paid on it.”
(2) Type of deed. What type of deed will be used to convey title to lots in the subdivision?
(3) Quitclaim deeds. If a quitclaim deed is to be given to lot purchasers insert the below warning, or a warning which is substantially the same, in the disclosure narrative below the caption “Quitclaim Deeds.” This particular warning may be deleted at the direction of the Director if an acceptable attorney's opinion is submitted with the Statement of Record which indicates that a quitclaim deed has a meaning in the jurisdiction where the subdivision is located which is substantially contrary to the effect of this warning. This warning shall be phrased substantially as follows: “The Quitclaim deed used to transfer title to lots in this subdivision gives you no assurance of ownership of your lot.”
(4) Oil, gas, and mineral rights. If oil, gas or mineral rights have been reserved, insert the following statement or one substantially the same in the narrative answer under the caption “oil, gas, and mineral rights”: “The (indicate oil, gas, or mineral rights) to (state which lots) in this subdivision will not belong to the purchaser of those lots. The exercise of these rights could affect the use, enjoyment and value of your lot.”
(c) Encumbrances, mortgages and liens-
(1) In general. State whether any of the lots or common facilities which serve the subdivision, other than recreation facilities, are subject to a blanket encumbrance, mortgage or lien. If yes, identify the type of encumbrance (e.g., deed of trust, mortgage, mechanics liens), the holder of the lien, and the lots covered by the lien. If any blanket encumbrance, mortgage, or lien is not current in accordance with its terms, so indicate.
(2) Release provisions.
(i) Explain the effect of any release provisions of any blanket encumbrance, mortgage or lien and include the one of the following statements that pertains.
(A) If the release clauses are not included in a recorded instrument, insert the statement set forth in section XV of the appendix to this part: Statement on Release Provisions, or one substantially the same in the disclosure narrative below under the caption “Release Provisions.”
(B) If the developer or subdivision owner states that the release provisions are recorded and that the lot purchaser may pay the release price of the mortgage, the statement shall be supported by documentation supplied in §1010.209. If the purchaser may pay the release fee, state the amount of the release fee and inform the purchaser that the amount may be in addition to the contract payments unless there is a bona fide trust or escrow arrangement in which the purchaser's payments are set aside to pay the release price before any payments are made to the developer.
(C)
(1) If there are no provisions in the blanket encumbrance for release of an individual purchaser's lot from a blanket encumbrance, include the warning set forth in section XVI of the appendix to this part: Warning for Release Provisions or a warning substantially the same, in the disclosure narrative under the “Release Provisions” caption.
(2) If the provisions for release of individual lots from the blanket encumbrance may be exercised only by the developer insert the following statement, or one substantially the same, in the disclosure narrative under the “Release Provisions” caption: “The release provisions in the (state the type of encumbrance) on (indicate all or particular lots) in this subdivision may be exercised only by us. Therefore, if we default on the (state type of encumbrance) before obtaining a release of your lot, you may lose your lot and any money you have paid for it.”
(d) Recording the contract and deed-
(1) Method or purpose of recording.
(i) State what protection, if any, recording of deeds and contracts gives a lot purchaser in your jurisdiction.
(ii) If the sales contract or deed may be recorded, so state. Also state whose responsibility it is to record the contract or deed.
(iii) If the developer or subdivision owner will not have the sales contract officially acknowledged or if the applicable jurisdiction will not record sales contracts, state that sales contracts will not be recorded and why they will not be recorded.
(iv) If at, or immediately after, the signing of a contract, the contract or a deed transfer to the buyer is not recorded by the developer or owner or if title to the lot is not otherwise transferred of record to a trust, or if other sufficient notice of transfer or sale is not placed of record, then the developer shall include the warning set forth in section XVII of the appendix to this part: Method and Purpose of Recording Warning, or substantially the same warning in the disclosure narrative under the caption “Method and Purpose of Recording.” The reference to contracts shall be deleted from the above warning if the answer to paragraph (d)(1)(i) of this section indicates that recording of a contract in the subject jurisdiction does not protect the purchaser from claims of later purchasers or creditors of anyone having an interest in the land.
(2) Title insurance. If the developer does not deliver a title insurance policy to the buyer, state that the purchaser should obtain an attorney's opinion of title or a title insurance policy which will describe the rights of ownership which are being acquired in the lot. Recommend that an appropriate professional should interpret the opinion or policy.
(e) Payments-
(1) Escrow. If purchasers' deposits, down payments, or installment payments are to be placed in a third party controlled escrow or similar account, describe the arrangement including the name and address of the escrow holder or similar person. If there is no such arrangement, insert the statement set forth in section XVIII of the appendix to this part: Escrow Statement. The questions regarding an escrow agreement or similar protection may be answered affirmatively only if the money is under the control of an independent third party, allowing a purchaser to receive a return of all money paid in the event of the developer's failure to convey title or the developer's default on any obligation which would otherwise result in the purchaser's loss of that money.
(2) Prepayments. Explain any prepayment penalties or privileges in everyday language.
(3) Default. What are the developer's or subdivision owners' remedies against a defaulted purchaser?
(f) Restrictions on the use of your lot-
(1) Restrictive covenants.
(i) Have any restrictive covenants been recorded against the land in the subdivision? If so, do they contain items which require the purchaser to secure permissions, approvals or take any other action prior to using or disposing of his lot (e.g., architectural control, developer's right of first refusal, building deadlines, etc.)? If any of these or similar items are included, explain their meaning and effect upon the purchaser.
(ii) If any restrictive covenants are to be used and if they have not been recorded, how will they be imposed? Include a statement to the effect that the restrictive covenants have not been recorded; that there is no assurance they will be applied uniformly; that they may be changed and that they may be difficult to enforce. If no restrictive covenants will be imposed, include a statement to the effect that, since there are no restrictive covenants on the use of the lots, they may be used for purposes which could adversely affect the use and enjoyment of surrounding lots.
(iii) If there are restrictive covenants, whether recorded or unrecorded, the following statement shall be made: “A complete copy of these restrictions is available upon request.”
(2) Easements.
(i) Are there easements which may have an effect on the purchaser's building or lot use plans (e.g., large drainage easements along lot lines, high voltage electric transmission lines, pipe lines or drainage easements which encroach upon the building area of the lot or inhibit its use)?
(ii) Is the subdivision subject to any type of flood control or flowage easements?
(iii) If the answer to either (2)(i) or (2)(ii) is in the affirmative, identify the affected lots and state the effect upon the use of the lots.
(g) Plats, zoning, surveying, permits and environment-
(1) Plats.
(i) Have the subdivision plans and plats of specific units been approved by the regulatory authorities? If the approvals have not been obtained, include a warning to the effect that regulatory authorities have not approved the proposed plats; that they may require significant alterations before they will approve them and they may not allow the land to be used for the purpose for which it is being sold.
(ii) Have plats covering the lots in this Report been recorded? If so, where are they recorded? If they have not been recorded, is the description of the lots given in this Report legally adequate for the conveyance of land in the jurisdiction where the subdivision is located? If it is not, include a statement to the effect that the description of the lots is not legally adequate for the conveyance of the lots and that it will not be until the plat is recorded.
(2) Zoning. For what purpose may the lots be used (e.g., single family homes, camping, commercial)? Does this use conform to local zoning requirements and the restrictive covenants?
(3) Surveying. Has each lot been surveyed and is each lot marked for identification? If not, and the purchaser is responsible for the expense, state the estimated cost.
(4) Permits. Must the purchaser obtain a building permit before beginning construction on his lot? Where is the permit obtained? Are any other permits necessary to use the lot for the purpose for which it is sold or for construction in connection with its use?
(5) Environment. Has there been any environmental impact study prepared which considers the effect of the subdivision on the environment? If a study has been prepared, summarize any adverse conclusions and refer the lot buyer to the proper State Clearinghouse for complete information. If a study has not been prepared, include a statement that “No determination has been made as to the possible adverse effects the subdivision may have upon the environment and surrounding area.” If the developer does not know whether an environmental impact study has been prepared, or the name and location of the Office where any study made can be found, inquiry should be made to the State or Area Clearinghouse established under the authority of title IV of the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act of 1968.
§1010.110 Roads.
(a) Access to the subdivision.
(1) Is access to the subdivision provided by public or private roads? What type of surface do they have? How many lanes? What is the width of the wearing surface?
(2) Who is responsible for their maintenance? What is the cost to the purchaser, if any? Are any improvements contemplated? If so, when will they begin and when will they be completed? At whose expense?
(b) Access within the subdivision.
(1) How have legal and physical access by conventional automobile been or will they be, provided to the lots (e.g., road on recorded easement; right of way dedicated to the public; right of way dedicated to use of lot owners)?
(2) Who is responsible for the road construction? Is there any construction cost to the purchaser? Is there any financial assurance of completion? If there is no financial assurance of completion, enter a warning to the effect that no funds have been set aside in an escrow or trust account and there are no other financial arrangements to assure completion of the roads.
(3) How many lanes do the interior roads have? What is the estimated starting date of construction (month and year); the present percentage of construction now complete; the present surface; the estimated completion date (month and year) and what is the final surface to be? If there are separate units or sections in the subdivision which will have different completion dates or different surfaces, the chart in section XIX of the appendix to this part: Road Chart shall be used rather than a narrative paragraph.
(4) Who is responsible for road maintenance? If the roads are to be maintained by a public authority, a property owners' association or some other entity at some time in the future, who is responsible for their maintenance during the interim period? What is the cost to the purchaser during the interim period and after acceptance for permanent maintenance? Will they be maintained so as to provide access to the lots on a year round basis? If not, include a warning which informs the purchaser that access may not be available year round. Identify the months when access may not be available to lots. If there are no arrangements for maintenance, include a warning to the effect that purchasers are responsible for maintaining the roads and that, if maintenance is not performed, the roads may soon deteriorate and access may become difficult or impossible.
(5) If estimated completion dates given in prior Statements of Record have not been met, state that previous dates have not been met and give the previous dates. Underline the answer. If the roads are 100 percent completed, no dates are needed.
(6) Complete the chart in section XX of the appendix to this part: Nearby Communities Chart by listing the county seat (identify) and at least two nearby communities. Include at least one community of significant size which offers general services.
(7) If the purchasers will be individually responsible for providing access to their lots and for maintaining that access, what is the estimated cost of construction and maintenance?
